CaptainCook4D: A Dataset for Understanding Errors
                   in Procedural Activities

Rohith Peddi ∗ Shivvrat Arya  Bharath Challa  Likhitha Pallapothula

Akshay Vyas Bhavya Gouripeddi Qifan Zhang Jikai Wang

Vasundhara Komaragiri Eric Ragan Nicholas Ruozzi Yu Xiang Vibhav Gogate

                                            Abstract

           Following step-by-step procedures is an essential component of various activities
           carried out by individuals in their daily lives. These procedures serve as a guiding
           framework that helps to achieve goals efficiently, whether it is assembling furniture
           or preparing a recipe. However, the complexity and duration of procedural activities
           inherently increase the likelihood of making errors. Understanding such procedural
           activities from a sequence of frames is a challenging task that demands an accurate
           interpretation of visual information and the ability to reason about the structure of
           the activity. To this end, we collect a new egocentric 4D dataset CaptainCook4D
           comprising 384 recordings (94.5 hours) of people performing recipes in real kitchen
           environments. This dataset consists of two distinct types of activities: one in
          which participants adhere to the provided recipe instructions and another in which
           they deviate and induce errors. We provide 5.3K step annotations and 10K fine-
           grained action annotations and benchmark the dataset for the following tasks: error
           recognition, multi-step localization and procedure learning2.

1 Introduction

Have you ever excitedly prepared your favourite meal after a long day, only to be disappointed
upon realizing you missed a key ingredient? Such scenarios are common because performing long
step-by-step procedures increases the likelihood of making errors. While some errors are harmless
and can be corrected with little consequence, others can have detrimental consequences, particularly
those that occur during medical procedures or complex chemical experiments. Therefore, there is a
pressing need to build AI systems that can guide users in performing procedural activities [15].

A key problem we need to solve in order to build such AI systems is procedural activity understand-
ing, a challenging and multifaceted task that demands interpreting what is happening —specifically,
determining whether the person is following the procedure correctly or making an error, anticipating
what will happen, and planning the course of action to accomplish the goal. For effective inter-
pretation, the system must be capable of recognizing and categorizing actions while assessing the
current state of the environment. To anticipate what might happen next, it should be able to forecast
actions right from the start of the interaction or even before it begins. Additionally, planning a course
of action necessitates understanding the potential consequences of these actions. Numerous datasets
have been developed to improve our understanding of procedural activities. However, these datasets
only include videos of individuals performing step-by-step tasks correctly without making any errors.

    ∗ Corresponding Author , = UT Dallas, = University of Florida
    2website: https://captaincook4d.github.io/captain-cook/

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.
      Recipe Task Gr aph                     Sampled Topological Or der s                                       Recipe Execution Or der s

START                               TO1:                                            INSTRUCTION     Nor mal :
                                    TO2:                                            NORMAL STEP     Nor mal :
                    SAMPLE          TO3:                                            ERROR STEP      Er r or :
                                    TO4:                                                             Er r or :
                                    TO5:                                   PERFORM                  Er r or :
                                    TO6:
                                                                                           NORMAL
                                                                                         RECORDING

                                                                                             ERROR
                                                                                         RECORDING

                                                                                                    PO6:

(a)Hololens2  ( b) Par t i ci pant   (c)Hololens2   (d)Hololens2              (e)Hololens2          (f)Hololens2 RGB  (g)GoPro RGB
 and GoPro                          3D Hand Joints      Depth              Camera Trajector y

Figure 1: Overview. Top: We constructed task graphs for the selected recipes. These graphs
facilitated sampling topological orders (cooking steps) that participants followed to perform. During
the execution of these steps, participants induced errors that were both intentional and unintentional
in nature. Bottom Left: We present the sensors employed for data collection. Bottom Right: We
describe the details of the modalities of the data collected while the participant performs the recipe.

But, for AI systems to effectively identify errors in procedural activities, it is essential to have datasets
that include both normal and error videos along with corresponding error annotations (descriptions).

Contributions. We introduce an egocentric3 4D dataset designed to enhance AI systems’ understand-
ing of procedural activities and improve their ability to recognize and anticipate errors.

       – Our dataset features participants performing recipes in real kitchen environments (Fig. 1). It
          includes two distinct types of activities: one where the participants follow the given recipe
          guidelines and another where they deviate (intentionally or unintentionally), making errors.

       – We provide annotations for (a) Start and end times for each step of the recipe, (b) Start
          and end times for each fine-grained action/interaction for 20% of the collected data, and
          (c) Detailed descriptions of the errors made by participants, which allowed us to compile a
          comprehensive overview of different error categories along with their brief explanations.

       – We provide baselines for the following procedure understanding tasks: (a) Error Recognition
          (supervised and zero-shot), (b) Multi-Step Localization, and (c) Procedure Learning.

2 Related Work

Understanding procedural activities with errors has witnessed significant traction recently and
spurred the development of new datasets (see Table 1) that aid in developing novel approaches to
recognize errors. Our dataset sets itself apart from others4 by four distinctive features: (1) Domain:
While others address errors during assembly and disassembly, we focus on cooking activities5. (2)
Environment: Unlike lab environments, we collected our dataset in real kitchen environments. (3)
Multimodal capabilities, and (4) Error diversity. A complete survey of all the relevant tasks is
outside the scope of the paper; thus, we provide a brief review of procedure understanding tasks
that are of particular interest to the proposed dataset and discuss their representative works.

Temporal Action Localization (TAL) in videos aims to identify and classify temporal boundaries
of action instances in long video sequences. TAL methods can be categorized into two primary
approaches: two-stage and single-stage. Two-stage methods operate in a sequential manner by
initially generating action proposals and subsequently classifying them. In contrast, single-stage
methods streamline the process by simultaneously performing action localization and classification,

    3An egocentric view despite ego motions helps minimize occlusions more effectively than exo-centric videos.
    4To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to categorize and provide brief descriptions for the error types.
    5Cooking activities are inherently complex and encompass several types of diverse cascading and non-
cascading errors that can compound and often alter the state of the environment with no point of return.

                                                                  2
Table 1: Ours vs Current Procedural Datasets (with/without errors): Our dataset not only advances the study
of procedural tasks found in existing literature but also enables a systematic analysis of errors in procedures.

Procedural Errors Dataset Name  Domain / Environment Ego Depth Recorded Error Labels Errors Nature Hours Year

× × Epic-Kitchens [11] Cooking / Real ✓ × ✓ -                           -              100 2018

   Ego4D [100]                  Daily-Life / Real    ✓  ✓  ✓  -         -              3000 2023

   50 Salads [87]               Cooking / Real       ×  ✓  ✓  -         -              4.5 2013

   Breakfast [51]               Cooking / Real       ×  ×  ✓  -         -              77 2014

✓ × MPII Cooking 2 [78] Cooking / Real × × ✓ -                          -              27 2015

   YouCook2[103]                Cooking / Real       ×  ×  ×  -         -              176 2017

   EGTEA Gaze+ [54]             Cooking / Real       ✓  ×  ✓  -         -              29 2020

   EgoProceL [3]                Assembly / Real, Lab ✓  ×  ✓  -         -              62 2022

✓  ✓ EgoTV [37]                 Cooking / Simulated  ✓  ×  -  ✓         Intentional    168 2023

   Assembly101 [19]             Toy Assembly / Lab   ✓  ×  ✓  Partial*  Unintentional  53 2022

   CSV [73]                     Chemistry / Lab      ×  ×  ✓     ×      Intentional    11.1 2022

✓  ✓ HoloAssist [93]            Assembly*/ Lab       ✓  ✓  ✓     ✓      Unintentional 166 2023
                                                                 ✓
   IndustReal [80]              Toy Assembly / Lab   ✓  ✓  ✓     ✓      Int. and Unint. 5.8 2024

   ATA [29]                     Toy Assembly / Lab   ✓  ×  ✓            Intentional    24.8 2024

✓  ✓ CaptainCook4D (Ours)       Cooking / Real       ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓         Int. and Unint. 94.5 2024

thus integrating both tasks into a single step. Datasets such as ActivityNet [18], Ava [33], Thumos14
[46], Epic-Kitchens [12], and Ego4D [32], helped develop advanced methods for TAL. Supervised
Multi-Step Localization (MSL) task, while similar to TAL, specifically targets procedural datasets.

Remark. Our dataset, featuring both normal and erroneous actions, offers a unique perspective and
helps evaluate the robustness of the MSL(TAL) methods in handling actions with deviations (errors).

Error Recognition in videos aims to identify errors (deviations from procedure text) in procedural
activities. It was introduced as mistake detection by Assembly-101 [19] where a multi-class classi-
fication problem was formulated to classify the given clip corresponding to a procedure as correct,
mistake or correction. Anomaly detection, while closely related to error recognition, differentiates
itself by using static cameras and backgrounds to identify abnormal behaviour. Recently, [26] pro-
posed an online error recognition method. Using Vision-and-Language Models (VLMs), they predict
future actions and compare these predictions with actual observations to recognize errors online6.

Remark. Unlike assembly, cooking involves continuous changes in the shape and color of the
ingredients thus making our dataset valuable for developing error recognition methods transferable to
procedural activities in the medical sector or that involve performing complex chemical experiments.

Procedure Learning in videos aims to identify the key steps in long video sequences and determine
their logical order to complete a procedural activity. Datasets such as CrossTask [105], COIN [89],
EgoProceL [3], Egtea [22], Meccano [75], Epic-Tents [44], helped develop advanced methods for
supervised, weakly-supervised and self-supervised procedure learning task variants.

Remark. Videos in our dataset are characterized by a longer average step length, which presents a
challenge for algorithms previously designed for the existing egocentric procedure learning datasets.

Other related tasks include Video Summarization [62], Temporal Action Segmentation [20, 53,
1, 8, 28], Object State Change Detection [86], Action Localization [106, 84], Adverb Recognition
[10, 10], Task Verification (Sequence Verification [97]) [37], Long Video Understanding [43, 41, 100],
Key-Step Localization [65, 58, 39], Procedure Planning [40] (Goal-Step Inference [99, 52, 70]), Self-
supervised procedural knowledge extraction [63] (Visual Transformation Telling [95]), Sequence-to-
sequence alignment [64, 35, 4, 6, 90, 47, 48, 79, 45, 88, 98, 85, 94] (Audio, Video synchronization
[61, 7, 72, 83]), Scene Graph Anticipation [69, 68], Temporal Adaptation, Semantic Role Labelling
[2, 5, 42], Procedure Learning [104, 49, 57, 102], Action Anticipation in Procedural Videos [81, 71].

3 Data Collection

Sensors. We utilized a Hololens2 device and a GoPro Hero 11 camera mounted on the user’s head
(see Fig. 1) to capture the activity data. We built a custom tool using hl2ss [14] to capture data from
the depth sensor, front RGB camera, microphone and the depth sensor of the hololens2 device. We
additionally captured the processed head and hand tracking information provided by the HoloLens2.

    6At the time of writing, the code for [26] was not released.

                                                     3
STEPS   Add 1 tea spoon of   Add 1 tablespoon    Rinse 1 cucumber  Add 1/4 teaspoon         Whisk 1 cup of chilled  Chop or grate  Add 1/4 teaspoon   PREPERATION ERROR
         cumin powder to    of chopped cilantro                    of red chilli powder      yogurt until smooth      cucumber      salt to the bowl  MEASUREMENT ERROR
               the bowl     leaves to the bowl                                                                                                        ORDER ERROR
                                                                                                                                                      TIMING ERROR
ERRORS  Spill while adding    Add Scallions      Use Zucchini        Missed                                                                           TECHNIQUE ERROR
           cumin power      instead of cilantro    instead of       Peeling                                                                           TEMPERATURE ERROR
                                                   cucumber        Cucumber                                                                           MISSING STEP

Figure 2: Snapshots of steps and recorded errors while preparing the recipe Cucumber Raita. Three
of the four errors were intentional, but the participant missed the Peeling step unintentionally.

Recipes. We curated a selection of 24 cooking recipes sourced from WikiHow (refer to Appendix
C), specifically focusing on recipes with a preparation time of 30 minutes or less. These recipes
encompassed a wide range of culinary traditions, showcasing the diversity of cooking styles in various
cuisines. Our primary objective was to identify and capture potential errors that could arise from
using various authentic cooking instruments in preparing recipes sampled from different cuisines.

Task Graphs. visually represents the sequential steps required to complete a recipe. Each node in
the task graph (for a recipe) corresponds to a step in a recipe, and a directed edge between a node
x and a node y in the graph indicates that x must be performed before y. Thus, a task graph is a
directed acyclic graph, with a topological order representing a valid recipe completion. To construct
task graphs for selected recipes, we identified all the critical steps involved and determined their
inter-dependencies, thus establishing a topological order of tasks (see website for final task graphs).

3.1 Protocol

Our dataset was compiled by eight participants7 in 10 different kitchens. Each participant was pro-
vided a tablet-based recording interface accessible through a web browser, a GoPro and a Hololens2.
Participants were instructed to adjust their GoPro cameras to capture footage in 4K resolution at 30
fps to ensure high-quality video. The HoloLens2 device was programmed to stream RGB frames
at 360p resolution and 30 fps. It also streamed depth frames in Articulated Hand Tracking mode,
referred to as depth_ahat mode. Besides visual data, the device also streamed three streams of IMU
(Inertial Measurement Unit) sensor data and spatial data, capturing both head and hand poses8.

Normal Recordings. A recording is classified as a normal recording when it is captured as the
participant accurately follows the procedure described in the recipe. Participants are presented with
one of the pre-constructed topological orders of the selected recipe9, as determined by the task graphs.
The participants then follow and perform each step from the topological order sequentially.

Error Recordings. A recording is classified as an error recording when it is captured while the
individual deviates from the recipe’s procedure, thereby inducing errors. Following the terminology
used in scientific disciplines such as neuroscience [9] and chemistry, we will refer to deviations
from procedures as errors10. Following [9, 25, 27], we classified common errors performed during
a cooking activity into the following categories: (1) Preparation Error, (2) Measurement Error, (3)
Technique Error, (4) Timing Error, (5) Temperature Error, (6) Missing Steps, and (7) Ordering Errors.

Error Induction. We developed three strategies11 for participants to choose from, each tailored
to perform the recipe in a specific environment. After choosing the strategy, participants were
given detailed instructions on how to perform the recipes. We list the strategies presented to the
participants (1) Impromptu: Participants were asked to induce errors while performing the recipe.
Following the completion of each recording, participants used a web-based interface to update the
errors they performed during each step. Due to the complex nature of cooking activities and the lack
of experience of the participants in cooking, many errors induced in this strategy were unintentional
(Figure 2 presents one such example). (2) Disordered Steps: Participants were given pre-prepared
error scripts with missing steps and ordering errors. (3) Induct Error: Participants used a web-based

    7During filming, participants were instructed to be alone in the kitchen environment and remove any items
that could potentially identify them, such as personal portraits, mirrors, and smartwatches with portraits.

    8The University of Florida IRB approved our protocol
    9Utilizing the recording interface, each participant chose a recipe from the selected 24 WikiHow recipes.
   10The term errors is synonymous with what the AI community typically calls mistakes (cf. [19]).
   11The practice of using scripted videos for activity understanding [82] has inspired us to develop the strategies.

                                                                                         4
               - Incomplete blending/ whisking/ mixing/ beating
PREPARATION - Usage of soiled/ dirty utensils/ ingredients/ hands ON ER
     ERRORS - Wrong utensil/ ingredients used                                                                                                                                                R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         R
               - Insufficient draining of fluids                                                                                                                                             M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         O
               - Cutting/ chopping without peeling LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         R

                              Recipe: Mug Cake; Step: Whisk Batter
Preparation Error: Incorrect usage of utensils such as spoon, tbs and hand to whisk

               - Excess/ less pressure to roll/ pat/ squeeze/ hold
TECHNIQUE - Spilling while measuring/ adding/ transferring ON ER
     ERRORS - Incorect chopping/ cutting technique                                                                                                                                           R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         R
               - Incorrect peeling/ spiralizing/ flipping techniques M
               - Incorrect stirring/ whisking/ beating techniques LA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     O

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         R

                Recipe: Cucumber Raita; Step: Chop cucumber into pieces
Technique Error: Cucumber is sliced vertically, cut improperly and sliced horizontally

               - Incorrect number/ count of ingredient used                                                                                                                                  N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E

MEASUREMENT - Incorrect measurement of ingredient used                                                                                                                                       O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           R

     ERRORS - Incorrect size of ingredient/ utensils used                                                                                                                                    R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           R
                                                                                                                                                                                             M
               - Rolling/ Cutting/ slicing into incorrect size                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           O
                                                                                                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                                                                                             LR

                       Recipe: Scrambled Eggs; Step: Peel 2 garlic cloves
Measurement Error: Different quantity of garlic cloves (1, 1 and 3 respectively peeled)

               - Incorrect cooking temperature                                                                                                                                               N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E

TEMPERATURE ERRORS - Incorrect powerlevel setting of microwave OR RR
               - Using hot water/ oil instead of cold water/ oil                                                                                                                             M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         O
                                                                                                                                                                                             AR
                                                                                                                                                                                             L

Recipe: Tomato Chutney; Step: Allow to simmer on low heat till mixture becomes thick
       Temperature Error: Incorrect usage of temperature and buringing the dish

                                                                                                                             N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         R
      ORDER ERRORS - Performing steps in incorrect order RO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         O
                                                                                                                             M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           R
                                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                             L

           Recipe: Spicy Tuna Wrap; Step: Top Lettuce leaves with tuna mixture
Order Error: Followed incorrect order where avocado is added after topping the leaves

     TI MI NG  - Incorrect time for cooking/ microwaving                                                                                                                                        MI SSI NG                                                                                                                                               - Partial/ complete omission of the step                                                                     ERROR TYPE                       COUNT
     ERRORS    - Insufficient time to melt/ heat                                                                                                                                                 STEPS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pr epar ation Er r or s                410
               - Incorrect waiting time                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Technique Er r or s                   502
               - Incorrect time for blending/ grinding                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Measur ement Er r or s                  331
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Temper atur e Er r or s                  66
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        795
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Or der Er r or s                   177
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Timing Er r or s                    285
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Missing Steps

Figure 3: Error Categories. Left: We present a categorization of participant-induced errors derived
from the annotated error descriptions of the recordings. Right: We display frames captured from
various recordings, highlighting correct and erroneous executions. Bottom Right: We present statistics
on the error categories in the dataset derived from the compiled annotations of all recordings.

40                 Video duration statistics                                                                                                                                 1000                              Step duration statistics                                                                                                                 20  Normal vs Error Recordings counts                                                                   Normal vs Error Recordings Durations
30                                                                                                                                                                            800            50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
Count20                                                                                                                                                                       600 883                                                                                                                                                                       Normal Recordings                                                       Recordings Duration(Hr)                               Normal Recordings Duration(Hr)
10                                                                                                                                                                            400    829                           Step Duration (Seconds)                                                                                        Number of Recordings      Error Recordings                                                                                                              Error Recordings Duration(Hr)
                   000                                                                                                                                                        200       697                                                                                                                                                             15                                                                                                   6
                      0
                                                                                                                                                                      Count     00524                                                                                                                                                                   10                                                                                                   4
                          2                                                                                                                                                                    490
                             2                                                                                                                                                                    350                                                                                                                                                   5                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                     274
                                 5                                                                                                                                                                      258                                                                                                                                             0 R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 R6 R7 R8 R9 R10R11R12R13R14R15R16R17R18R19R20R21R22R23R24                           0 R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 R6 R7 R8 R9 R10R11R12R13R14R15R16R17R18R19R20R21R22R23R24
                                    9                                                                                                                                                                       155                                                                                                                                                                                        Recipes                                                                                               Recipes
                                        17                                                                                                                                                                     120
                                           24                                                                                                                                                                     120
                                               12                                                                                                                                                                     79
                                                  20                                                                                                                                                                     95
                                                      33                                                                                                                                                                    65
                                                         33                                                                                                                                                                    48
                                                             26                                                                                                                                                                    42
                                                                35                                                                                                                                                                    43
                                                                    22                                                                                                                                                                   41
                                                                        16                                                                                                                                                                   24
                                                                           18                                                                                                                                                                   16
                                                                               16                                                                                                                                                                  22
                                                                                  20                                                                                                                                                                  8
                                                                                      11                                                                                                                                                                  13
                                                                                         8                                                                                                                                                                   18
                                                                                             10                                                                                                                                                                 9
                                                                                                10                                                                                                                                                                  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                    7                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                       0                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7
                                                                                                           2                                                                                                                                                                        7
                                                                                                              2                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          8
                                                                                                                  6                                                                                                                                                                           4
                                                                                                                     3                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                         2                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                            2                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                3                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                   3                                                                                                                                                                          4
                                                                                                                                       1                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                          0                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                              2                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                  2                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                     0                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                   2

     9         18                        27   36
               Video Duration (Minutes)

Figure 4: Statistics. Top: We present video and step duration statistics to the left & right respectively.
Bottom: We present the total count and the durations of normal and error recordings for each recipe.

interface to create an error script for each selected recipe recording. The modified recipe steps were
displayed on a tablet, enabling participants to perform according to their scripted errors. In Fig. 4, we
present both general statistics of the dataset and specific statistics of normal and error recordings.

3.2 Data Annotation

We implemented a dual-layer review process to guarantee high-quality annotations. Each video was
first annotated by the person who recorded it and then reviewed for accuracy by a second reviewer.
Thus ensuring that all errors were correctly captured in the annotations corresponding to each step.
Our annotations are structured to provide detailed insights into the recorded actions, facilitating both
coarse-grained and fine-grained action analyses. Specifically, we offer the following annotations: (1)
Coarse-Grained Actions: We mark the start and end times of each step in a recording of the recipe.
(2) Fine-Grained Actions: For 20% of our data, we provide fine-grained action annotations to
support semi/weakly supervised learning techniques for action recognition. (3) Error Descriptions:
For each step, if an error occurs during its execution, we link its step annotation with the specific
category of the error and a description of the error, thus enabling a comprehensive understanding.

Coarse-Grained Action/Step Annotations. We designed an interface for annotating steps in Label
Studio12. Annotators are presented with this interface to mark each step’s start and end times. Our
coarse-grained actions/steps are significantly longer than a single fine-grained action and encompass
multiple such fine-grained actions to perform the described step successfully. For example, to

   12https://labelstud.io/

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5
accomplish the step {Chop a tomato}, we include the following in the annotation (1) Pre-conditional
actions: {opening refrigerator, grabbing a polythene bag of tomatoes, taking a tomato, placing
the tomato on cutting board, close fridge} (2) Post-conditional actions: {placing down the knife,
grabbing the polythene bag of tomatoes, opening refrigerator and placing the bag in the refrigerator}.

Fine-Grained Action Annotations. Inspired by the pause-and-talk [11], we have developed a
web-based tool for fine-grained action annotations using Whisper [74] (for speech-to-text translation).

Error Category Annotations. Following each recording, participants were also asked to categorize
errors performed in each step based on a set of guidelines. Specifically, we ask participants to
broadly classify an error as a (1) Preparation Error when they use soiled/wrong ingredients or use
different tools, (2) Measurement Error when they use wrongly measured ingredients, (3) Timing
Error when they perform a step in shorter or longer duration than what is prescribed (e.g. Microwave
for Microwave instead of 30 seconds) (4) Temperature Error when they set higher/lower power levels
in the microwave or on a stove than what is prescribed (5) Missing Step when they omit to perform
a step (6) Technique Error when they perform the required action incorrectly, leading to a wrong
outcome than expected. (7) Order Error when they execute steps out of the required sequence. We
compile and present the categorization of errors, their descriptions and visual illustrations in Fig. 3.

4 Experiments

Our experiments are designed to address the following questions: (Q1) What is the efficacy of
transfer learning in recognizing errors? (Q2) How effective are current Vision Language Models
(VLMs) in zero-shot error recognition? (Q3) How do state-of-the-art Multi-Step Localization methods
perform on our dataset, particularly in terms of robustness to technique errors? (Q4) How do current
self-supervised procedure learning methods in literature perform when applied to our dataset13?

Features. To answer the above questions we trained14 our proposed baseline models on features
obtained using pre-trained models such as 3D-ResNet [34], SlowFast [24], X3D [23], VideoMAE
[91], Imagebind [30] and Omnivore [31] which were originally trained for video recognition tasks.
Specifically, we split each video into 1-second sub-segments and extracted features to train models.

4.1 Error Recognition

This section answers questions (Q1) and (Q2); specifically, we address Q1 by formulating the error
recognition task as a supervised binary classification problem. We proposed three architectural
variants (Fig. 5) as our baseline models and trained them using video/multimodal features. To
address Q2, we employed a prompt-and-predict paradigm to recognize errors in activity recordings.
Specifically, we formulated the problem as a Video Question Answering task (Fig. 6), crafted targeted
question prompts using task graphs and error annotations(Fig.3); supplied these engineered prompts
along with the videos as input to a VLM and evaluated its performance in zero-shot error recognition.

Supervised Error Recognition (SupervisedER). We utilized the features extracted using pre-trained
models to train variants of our baseline binary classification models and evaluated trained models
using the standard metrics such as accuracy, precision, recall, F1 and AUC (see Table 2). Specifically,
we trained our models to classify each step of a video into one of two classes {error(1), normal(0)}.
We constructed two data splits, step and recording splits, for training error recognition models. For
the step split, we first compiled a dataset of video segments corresponding to all steps of all recipes
in the dataset. Then divided it into train, validation, and test subsets. For the recordings split, we
compiled all the recordings of all recipes in the dataset and divided the dataset into train, validation,
and test subsets. Using error annotations (Figure 3), we first generated class labels for all video
segments corresponding to the recipe steps. Then, we assigned the class label corresponding to the
step to all 1-second sub-segments within the step and trained baseline models. During inference, we
assigned the majority class label of the sub-segments corresponding to a step as the label to that step.

We proposed three architectural variants as baselines:{V1, V2, V3} (see Fig. 5). In V1, we used the
extracted features and constructed labels as described above and trained a Multi-Layer Perceptron
(MLP) head. This approach assesses the efficacy of visual cues identified by pre-trained video

   13Characterized by longer step durations, refer App. C for a comparison across procedural activity datasets
   14We present the details about hyperparameters used for training the proposed baseline models in Appendix B.

                                                           6
                                                                                                                                    Split Backbone V# Modality Acc P                  R       F1                 AUC

          TRAINED                                                                                                                      Omnivore V1 V                    71.09 66.07 14.86    24.26               75.7
                                                                                                                                                        V2 V            69.96 51.56 59.84    55.39               75.7

          FROZEN                                                RGB                                                                                   V1 V              33.54 31.88 90.6     47.16               63.06
                                                      RGB                                                                                             V2 V              68.09 47.69 24.9     32.72               67.18
                                                                                                                                       Slowfast
                                                                                                                                                                                             27.51               60.19
           MODALITY                                                                                                                    X3D            V1 V              68.34 48 19.28       15.74               61.5
     REPRESENTATIONS                                                                                                                                  V2 V              67.83 42.86 9.64
                                                                                                                                                                                             47.1                66.16
                                                                                                                                    S                                                        47.88               64.5

            COMBINED                                                                                                                   3DResnet       V1 V              63.45 42.9 52.21     35.01               57.03                         VIDEO SEGMENT            BACKBONE
      REPRESENTATIONS                                                                                                                                 V2 V              61.58 41.47 56.63    44.69               52.23
                                                                                                                                                                                             39.84               53.87        VARIANT-1
MLP  FORWARD PASS OF                                                                                                                   ImageBind V3         V           62.78  38.46  32.13  42.36               61.1
     REPRESENTATIONS                                                                                                                                        A           43.86  32.26  72.69  49.84               70.41
                                                                                                                                                            V, A        63.28  40.76  38.96
          MULTI LAYER                                                                                                                                       V, A, T     68.79  42.76  41.96  50.91               63.03
         PERCEPTRON                                                                                                                                                                          39.04               62.27
                                                                                                                                                            V, A, D, T  69.4   50.75  48.96
                                                                                                                                                                                             30.93               56.89
                                RGB                                                                                                    Omnivore V1 V                    59.76  45.31  58.09  42.6                59.83                VIDEO SEGMENT           BACKBONE                                                    ENCODER
                                                                                                                                                        V2 V            62.3   46.55  33.61
                                                                                                                                                                                             44.12               54.66        VARIANT-2
                                                                                                                                       Slowfast       V1 V              60.06  40.82  24.9   48.75               56.58
                                                                                                                                                      V2 V              57.82  41.67  43.57
                                                                                                    WEIGHTED                                                                                 53.79               62.42
                                 Actor's hand is on                                                 SUMMATION                                                           54.69  39.6   49.79  50.09               59.22
                                top of cutting board                                                                                                                    54.25  40.78  60.58
     RGB                         beside lettuce leaf                                                                                R X3D             V1 V                                   52.55               54.1
                                                                                                                                                      V2 V                                   50.54               54.8
                                   TEXT                                                                                                                                                      49.42               55.25
                                                                                                                                                                                             50.13               58.35
                          DEPTH                                                                                                        3DResnet V1          V           41.88  37.65  94.19  56.02               65.25                                                                               TRANSFORMER ENCODER
                         AUDIO                                                                                                                          V2  V           57.82  43.56  58.92                                                                                        POSITION ENCODER

Figure 5: SupervisedER architectures of 3 baselines.                                                                                   ImageBind V3         V           37.56  36.14  96.27                                                                   BACKBONE
                                                                                                                                                            A           39.05  35.67  89.72
                                                                                                                                                            V, A        54.25  40.98  62.24     MULTIMODAL DATA       LaViLa
                                                                                                                                                            V, A, T     64.08  44.15  58.01  FOR AN INTERVAL

                                                                                                                                                            V, A, D, T  63.87  49.57  64.4

                                                                                                                                    Table 2: SupervisedER evaluation results of base-
                                                                                                                                    lines. Variant type (V#), Modality of features (M),
                                                                                                                                    Video (V), Audio (A), Depth (D), and Text (T).
                                                                                                                                                                                             VARIANT-3
recognition models in recognizing errors in sub-segments. In V2, we shifted our focus from sub-
segment prediction and trained a transformer that processed all video sub-segments corresponding
to each step. This method is designed to capitalize on the long-term temporal cues present within
the video segments of recipe steps to enhance the prediction performance of the trained models. In
variant V3, we harnessed the multimodal data of recordings and trained a unified transformer model.
This approach employed an attention mechanism to integrate information from all modalities of data.

Insights. Our V2 models consistently outperformed V1 models. Incorporating additional data modal-
ities like audio, text, and depth into our V3 models significantly improved their performance. Our
omnivore-based V2 models performed similarly to our V3 models trained using Imagebind15 features.

                                     VARIANT-1 VARIANT-2                                            ERROR CATEGORY                     VLM                  Variant Acc        P      R                 F1
                                      RECIPE TASK GRAPH                                             QUERY TEMPLATES
                                                                                        Llama 3                                        Video-LLaVa [55] V1              64.3 34.2 3.9 6.7
                                               S                                                                    ENGINEERED
                         Video
                                                                                 Video                                  FROZEN
STEP QUERY                                                                                                               QUERY
  PROMPTS                                                                                                             TEMPLATES                             V2 52.85 36.3 49.3 41.8
                                                                                                                    RECIPE STEP
                                                                                        STEP QUERY                   STEP QUERY        TimeChat [76]        V1          65.0 51.11 1.15 2.26
                                                                                          PROMPTS                       PROMPT
                                                                                                                         ERROR
                                                                                                                      CATEGORY                              V2          43.5 34.38 69.7 46.1
                                                                                                                     STEP QUERY
     VLM                                                     VLM                                                        PROMPT         Table 3: ZeroShotER evaluation results.

            NORMAL (0)                                ERROR (1)

Figure 6: ZeroShotER evaluation pipeline of VLMs

Zero-Shot Error Recognition (ZeroShotER). We proposed two baseline variants, V1 and V2, for
ZeroShotER16 using prompt-and-predict architectures, as illustrated in Fig. 6. Both variants involve
constructing query prompts for each recipe step and querying VLMs using these prompts along with
video inputs. We utilized state-of-the-art17 open-source VLMs, Video-LLaVa [55] and TimeChat
[76], to recognize errors and reported the evaluation results using standard metrics, such as accuracy,
precision, recall, and F1 scores. Specifically, for V1, we leveraged the associated task graphs of each
recipe and generated a prefix question prompt for each step. These prompts were then used to query
VLMs to recognize errors in videos. We employed a prompt-ensembling approach in V2 to recognize
errors in a shift from the single-prompt strategy. Specifically, we designed prompt templates tailored
to each error category (refer to Appendix B for examples). Using Llama3 [92], we generated a set

   15We chose Imagebind to represent visual, textual, and auditory data in a unified embedding space.
   16We also adapted anomaly detection methods for zero-shot error recognition (refer to Appendix B.)
   17State-of-the-art at the time of writing this paper

                                                                                                                                 7
of query prompts tailored to specific recipe steps and error categories. We combined the VLMs’
predictions for error category-specific queries using an OR operation to determine the prediction
for each step. This strategy of using error category-specific queries focused the VLMs’ attention on
specific segments of the video and enhanced the overall performance as illustrated in Table. 3.

Insights. While VLMs are adept at interpreting short video segments and answering straightforward
questions (Eg. Is there cucumber in the video?, Is the person peeling the cucumber?), they struggle
with tasks that require assimilation of information from various time intervals in long videos. This
limitation becomes evident in tasks like error recognition in ego-centric videos, where questions such
as "Did the person chop or grate a completely peeled cucumber?" require a deeper understanding.

Remark. The low scores indicate the complexity of the above tasks and call for developing sophisti-
cated methods that semantically understand the context, meaning, and cause of various errors.

4.2 Multi Step Localization (MSL)

In supervised MSL, we aim to simultaneously identify the start and end boundaries of steps within
an untrimmed long video and classify these identified video segments. This section addresses the
question (Q3) by splitting it into two parts. For the first part—How do state-of-the-art supervised MSL
methods fare on our dataset?; We utilized the features extracted from pre-trained video recognition
models and trained our baseline models which employed ActionFormer [101] head on three proposed
splits (indicated using the symbols {E, P, R} and detailed in App.A) of the original dataset. For the
second part - How robust are MSL methods to technique errors?; We trained baseline models on three
proposed splits ({E, P, R}) of a modified dataset where the training subset exclusively contained
normal recordings without errors. We then evaluated these models on two distinct test sets that
exclusively comprised either normal recordings or error recordings (indicated using the symbols Tn
and Te respectively). We reported results using the standard MSL/TAL metrics such as Recall@K
(R@K) and Mean Average Precision (mAP) across different temporal Intersections over Unions (It).
We presented our evaluation for both the tasks, namely, Multi-Step Localization (MSL) and Robust
Multi-Step Localization (RobustMSL), in Tables 4 and 5 respectively. We also showcased qualitative
examples of step localization for sampled normal and error recordings from 4 recipes in Figure 7.

               Table 4: MSL evaluation results.                                  Table 5: RobustMSL evaluation results.

B           D  It = 0.1              It = 0.3    It = 0.5                     B  DT                  It = 0.1  It = 0.3  It = 0.5

               mAP R@1 R@5 mAP R@1 R@5 mAP R@1 R@5                                   mAP R@1 R@5 mAP R@1 R@5 mAP R@1 R@5

3D Resnet   E 25.98 54.82 77.59 23.75 48.38 72.19 19.59 38.44 61.87              E Tn 24.44 38.22 52.48 22.97 34.77 49.51 18.67 28.57 42.68
            P 29.29 63.07 88.96 27.71 56.60 84.75 23.21 46.79 76.86                    Te 7.53 13.54 20.52 6.93 11.4 18.36 5.63 8.55 15.13
            R 29.39 61.14 85.41 27.89 55.82 82.17 23.97 46.54 73.29
                                                                              VideoMAE P Tn 26.78 37.43 46.28 25.68 34.79 44.6 22.02 29.43 39.81
            E 27.68 55.73 77.45 25.51 48.98 70.90 21.09 37.82 60.58                                   Te 16.98 27.43 37.76 16.46 25.53 36.03 14.64 22.03 32.07
            P 32.77 63.22 90.43 31.21 58.82 86.82 27.25 50.70 79.49
Slowfast    R 32.90 63.97 89.29 31.47 59.26 85.32 27.89 51.62 77.27              R Tn 26.27 37.15 46.93 24.71 34.06 45.03 21.51 29.36 40.44
                                                                                       Te 15.43 25.94 33.97 14.44 23.23 32.35 12.96 19.83 28.99

                  E 28.12 51.76 73.00 26.38 46.16 67.87 21.35 37.12 57.81        E Tn 34.65 47.91 60.63 33.06 44.77 58.36 28.59 38.38 51.9
VideoMAE P 38.86 64.86 84.05 37.41 60.32 80.63 32.24 51.46 71.88                       Te 12.51 19.6 27.06 11.66 17.54 24.45 9.94 14.63 20.96

                  R 37.44 63.08 80.90 35.11 57.30 77.38 30.76 49.19 69.43     Omnivore P Tn 32.5 44.45 52.47 31.13 41.53 50.91 28.39 37.03 47.97
                                                                                                     Te 21.28 31.51 40.93 20.12 28.81 39.6 18.08 24.96 36.77
            E 40.40 67.51 87.69 38.32 62.31 82.82 33.41 53.01 72.85
Omnivore    P 48.16 75.96 93.41 45.82 70.34 90.51 41.16 62.00 84.73              R Tn 30.22 42.43 52.11 28.94 39.47 50.49 25.15 32.65 46.51
            R 44.81 73.71 93.34 42.76 68.14 89.82 37.19 56.93 81.86                    Te 19.54 31.28 41.24 18.4 28.66 39.33 16.27 24.28 35.35

               SPICED HOT CHOCOLATE  DRESSED UP MEATBALLS                     MICROWAVE EGGSANDWICH            RAMEN

  NORMAL                                                                                                                 GROUND TRUTH
RECORDI NG                                                                                                               PREDI CTED

   ERROR                                                                                                                 GROUND TRUTH
RECORDI NG                                                                                                               PREDI CTED

            Figure 7: MSL qualitative results of the Omnivore-based model trained using the split R.

Insights. We observed that our models based on Omnivore features consistently outperformed others.
We also noticed that models trained using features extracted from longer video sub-segments (>1sec)
outperformed those trained using features extracted from 1-sec video sub-segments (App.B). However,
all our trained models using the modified dataset exhibited poor performance on Te compared to Tn.

Remark. We conjecture that exploiting semantic information from task graphs and employing
probabilistic filtering methods such as particle filters to refine predictions could enhance performance.

                                                                           8
4.3 Procedure Learning

Given long, untrimmed videos of procedural activities where the sequences of steps can be performed
in multiple orders, self-supervised procedure learning methods aim to identify relevant frames across
videos of an activity and estimate the sequential steps required to complete the activity. In this section,
we address the question Q4 by simultaneously answering (a) Can we infer the underlying procedure
(recipe text) from the videos of a particular recipe and (b) How does the self-supervised procedure
learning methods in literature perform on the proposed dataset?. Specifically, we answered both parts
by comparing the performance of our models trained on the proposed dataset using self-supervised
procedure learning methods [3, 16] against the random setting defined by EgoProceL [3](see Tab. 6).
We followed the setup described in EgoProceL and trained two embedder networks, one using
the Cycleback Regression loss (C) [M1] [16] and the other using a blend of two loss functions:
Cycleback Regression loss (C) and Contrastive - Inverse Difference Moment loss (C ) [M2][3]. The
combined loss function is C + λ × C , where λ is a hyperparameter. While we exclusively used these
loss functions to train the embedder networks, we continued using the Pro-Cut Module to categorize
frames into key steps. We presented evaluation results for 5 recipes Tab. 6 and all recipes in App. B.

Table 6: Procedure Learning. Here, P represents precision, R represents recall, and I represents IOU.

Recipe           Random        M1 [16]     M2 [3]
              PR I
                            P  RI       P  RI

BlenderBananaPancakes 7.40 3.83 2.26 12.65 9.50 5.16 15.54 9.96 5.72

Coffee        6.54 3.87 2.17 13.68 9.91 5.49 15.76 10.25 5.63

MugCake       5.45 4.00 2.12 16.12 12.95 6.87 10.32 8.85 4.40

PanFriedTofu  5.35 3.97 1.54 8.86 10.39 3.75 9.34 12.44 3.87

Pinwheels     6.54 4.28 2.13 13.58 11.96 5.92 16.08 13.06 7.05

Average of 24 recipes 7.61 3.92 2.22 15.62 10.85 5.78 15.78 10.68 5.82

Insights. Our models significantly outperformed the predefined random setting, demonstrating the
feasibility of inferring procedural steps from our dataset. However, these models scored lower on
our dataset compared to existing procedure learning datasets. We believe this drop in performance is
mainly due to our dataset’s unique challenge, which includes videos with longer key step durations.

Additional Results. We provide several analyses in Appendix B, including (a) Error Category
Recognition, (b) Early Error Recognition, (c) Anomaly Detection and (d) Ablation studies for MSL.

5 Discussion, Limitations and Future Work

Discussion. We introduced a novel egocentric dataset for understanding errors in procedural activities.
Our dataset consists of synchronized egocentric views, audio, and depth information specifically
designed for tasks such as 3D activity analysis, Procedure Learning, Error Recognition, and more.
While current methods have yielded promising outcomes, they continue to struggle to tackle these
challenges adequately with satisfactory results, as demonstrated by our experimental assessment.
This indicates the need for further exploration in this domain.

Limitations. We aimed to capture deviations during procedural activities from an egocentric perspec-
tive. Since such data cannot be sourced from crowd-sourced platforms, we captured participant data
while performing procedural activities. By the nature of the problem, errors that occur when per-
forming procedural activities are combinatorial and can have a compounding effect. Thus, our work
has the following limitations: (1) For each activity, the errors captured and presented in the dataset
form a subset of the whole combinatorial space; (2) Capturing 4D data in real kitchen environments
posed logistical and equipment training challenges. As a result, we were compelled to limit the data
collection to a specific geographic area.

Future Work. Our work opens up several avenues for future work. First, an exciting direction is
the extension of the dataset to include activities from other domains. By incorporating tasks such
as executing hardware-related activities (e.g., working with cars or computer parts), the dataset can
encompass a wider range of activities. Second, the dataset can be used to compare and develop
methods for solving various tasks such as Few-Shot Error Recognition using visual/textual prompts,
Semantic Role Labelling, Long Video Understanding, Procedure Planning, Reducing Errors, etc.

                         9
Acknowledgements

This work was supported in part by the DARPA Perceptually-Enabled Task Guidance (PTG) Program
under contract number HR00112220005, by the DARPA Assured Neuro Symbolic Learning and
Reasoning (ANSR) Program under contract number HR001122S0039, by the National Science
Foundation grant IIS-1652835 and by the AFOSR award FA9550-23-1-0239. We would like to
express our gratitude to all the reviewers for their insightful comments and queries, which have
substantially enhanced the quality of our manuscript. We would also like to extremely thank Sai
Krishna, Zhang Yang, Jihan Wang, Enoch Chiu, Pratyush Kaware, Saurabh Bhole, Ankit Upadhyay,
Vashist Gupta, Samuel, Jyothise, Shruthi and Manogna for allowing us to collect data in their kitchens.

References

   [1] Yazan Abu Farha, Juergen Gall, Jürgen Gall, and Juergen Gall. MS-TCN: Multi-Stage
        Temporal Convolutional Network for Action Segmentation. Computer Vision and Pattern
        Recognition, pages 3575–3584, June 2019. ARXIV_ID: 2006.09220 MAG ID: 2963853051
        S2ID: b4673e744d0ded47fe6df3b6314f79a41359578b.

   [2] Arka Sadhu, Tanmay Gupta, Mark Yatskar, R. Nevatia, and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Visual
        Semantic Role Labeling for Video Understanding. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
        2021. ARXIV_ID: 2104.00990 S2ID: 588a3b90556069ec02cd40c93b8092e21d10bb1c.

   [3] Bansal, Siddhant, Arora, Chetan, and Jawahar, C. V. My View is the Best View: Procedure
        Learning from Egocentric Videos. European Conference on Computer Vision, july 2022.

   [4] Behrmann, Nadine, Golestaneh, S. Alireza, Kolter, Zico, Gall, Juergen, and Noroozi, Mehdi.
        Unified Fully and Timestamp Supervised Temporal Action Segmentation via Sequence to Se-
        quence Translation. European Conference on Computer Vision, September 2022. ARXIV_ID:
        2209.00638 MAG ID: 4294435452 S2ID: fbca18b2d3b2fb964fcc03f24712dd3234f30381.

   [5] Piotr Bojanowski, Rémi Lajugie, Francis Bach, Ivan Laptev, Jean Ponce, Cordelia Schmid,
        and Josef Sivic. Weakly supervised action labeling in videos under ordering constraints. In
        David Fleet, Tomas Pajdla, Bernt Schiele, and Tinne Tuytelaars, editors, Computer Vision –
        ECCV 2014, pages 628–643, Cham, 2014. Springer International Publishing.

   [6] Piotr Bojanowski, Rémi Lajugie, Edouard Grave, Francis Bach, Ivan Laptev, Jean Ponce,
        Cordelia Schmid, and Cordelia Schmid. Weakly-Supervised Alignment of Video With Text.
        arXiv: Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, May 2015. ARXIV_ID: 1505.06027 MAG
        ID: 2950255061 S2ID: 59ac98f3910dad473e7771ac61f796a038f1708f.

   [7] Bowen Shi, Wei-Ning Hsu, Kushal Lakhotia, and Abdel-rahman Mohamed. Learning
        Audio-Visual Speech Representation by Masked Multimodal Cluster Prediction. Inter-
        national Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. ARXIV_ID: 2201.02184 S2ID:
        dc9a76b7cb690e6a95f0f07bb3d4fabb7181b68d.

   [8] Chien-Yi Chang, De-An Huang, Yanan Sui, Li Fei-Fei, and Juan Carlos Niebles. D3TW:
        discriminative differentiable dynamic time warping for weakly supervised action alignment and
        segmentation. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2019,
        Long Beach, CA, USA, June 16-20, 2019, pages 3546–3555. Computer Vision Foundation /
        IEEE, 2019.

   [9] Mathilde P. Chevignard, Cathy Catroppa, Jane Galvin, and Vicki Anderson. Development
        and evaluation of an ecological task to assess executive functioning post childhood tbi: The
        children’s cooking task. Brain Impairment, 11(2):125–143, 2010.

 [10] D. Moltisanti, Frank Keller, Hakan Bilen, and Laura Sevilla-Lara. Learning Action Changes
        by Measuring Verb-Adverb Textual Relationships. arXiv.org, 2023. ARXIV_ID: 2303.15086
        S2ID: 6db9e79524529d01a38fb16bb819e8c4301896d3.

 [11] Dima Damen, Hazel Doughty, Giovanni Maria Farinella, Sanja Fidler, Antonino Furnari,
        Evangelos Kazakos, Davide Moltisanti, Jonathan Munro, Toby Perrett, William Price, Will
        Price, Will Price, and Michael Wray. The EPIC-KITCHENS Dataset: Collection, Challenges

                                                          10
      and Baselines. arXiv: Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, April 2020. ARXIV_ID:
      2005.00343 MAG ID: 3022491006 S2ID: 1badccbe4a3cbf8662b924a97bbeea14fe2f1ac7.

[12] Dima Damen, Hazel Doughty, Giovanni Maria Farinella, Antonino Furnari, Evangelos Kaza-
      kos, Jian Ma, Davide Moltisanti, Jonathan Munro, Toby Perrett, Will Price, and Michael Wray.
      Rescaling Egocentric Vision: Collection, Pipeline and Challenges for EPIC-KITCHENS-100.
      International Journal of Computer Vision, October 2021.

[13] Fernando De la Torre, Jessica K. Hodgins, Adam W. Bargteil, Xavier Martin, J. Robert Macey,
      Alex Tusell Collado, and Pep Beltran. Guide to the carnegie mellon university multimodal
      activity (cmu-mmac) database. In Tech. report CMU-RI-TR-08-22, Robotics Institute, Carnegie
      Mellon University, April 2008.

[14] Dibene, Juan C. and Dunn, Enrique. HoloLens 2 Sensor Streaming. Cornell Univer-
      sity - arXiv, November 2022. ARXIV_ID: 2211.02648 MAG ID: 4308505718 S2ID:
      b19229b4f8667dae5017cae4df5c37086332da17.

[15] Bruce Draper. DARPA’s Perceptually-enabled Task Guidance (PTG) program, 2021.

[16] Debidatta Dwibedi, Yusuf Aytar, Jonathan Tompson, Pierre Sermanet, and Andrew Zisserman.
      Temporal cycle-consistency learning. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
      Recognition (CVPR), June 2019.

[17] Ehsan Elhamifar and Zwe Naing. Unsupervised procedure learning via joint dynamic summa-
      rization. International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019.

[18] Bernard Ghanem Fabian Caba Heilbron, Victor Escorcia and Juan Carlos Niebles. Activitynet:
      A large-scale video benchmark for human activity understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE
      Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 961–970, 2015.

[19] Fadime Sener, Dibyadip Chatterjee, Daniel Shelepov, Kun He, Dipika Singhania, Robert Wang,
      and Angela Yao. Assembly101: A Large-Scale Multi-View Video Dataset for Understanding
      Procedural Activities. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.

[20] Fangqiu Yi, Hongyu Wen, and Tingting Jiang. ASFormer: Transformer for Action Seg-
      mentation. British Machine Vision Conference, 2021. ARXIV_ID: 2110.08568 S2ID:
      b4713949345551ebb6763f83004f9da68b760b6f.

[21] A. Fathi, Xiaofeng Ren, and J. M. Rehg. Learning to recognize objects in egocentric activities.
      In Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
      CVPR ’11, page 3281–3288, USA, 2011. IEEE Computer Society.

[22] Alireza Fathi, Xiaofeng Ren, and James M. Rehg. Learning to recognize objects in egocentric
      activities. In CVPR 2011, pages 3281–3288. IEEE, June 2011.

[23] Christoph Feichtenhofer. X3D: Expanding Architectures for Efficient Video Recognition,
      April 2020.

[24] Christoph Feichtenhofer, Haoqi Fan, Jitendra Malik, and Kaiming He. SlowFast Networks for
      Video Recognition, October 2019.

[25] Torun G Finnanger, Stein Andersson, Mathilde Chevignard, Gøril O Johansen, Anne E Brandt,
      Ruth E Hypher, Kari Risnes, Torstein B Rø, and Jan Stubberud. Assessment of executive
      function in everyday life-psychometric properties of the norwegian adaptation of the children’s
      cooking task. Frontiers in human neuroscience, 15:761755, 2021.

[26] Alessandro Flaborea, Guido Maria D’Amely di Melendugno, Leonardo Plini, Luca Scofano,
      Edoardo De Matteis, Antonino Furnari, Giovanni Maria Farinella, and Fabio Galasso. Prego:
      online mistake detection in procedural egocentric videos, 2024.

[27] Yael Fogel, Sara Rosenblum, Renana Hirsh, Mathilde Chevignard, and Naomi Josman. Daily
      performance of adolescents with executive function deficits: An empirical study using a
      complex-cooking task. Occupational therapy international, 2020:3051809, 2020.

                                                         11
[28] Daniel Fried, Daniel Fried, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Phil Blunsom, Chris Dyer, Chris Dyer,
      Stephen Clark, and Aida Nematzadeh. Learning to Segment Actions from Observa-
      tion and Narration. Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
      pages 2569–2588, May 2020. ARXIV_ID: 2005.03684 MAG ID: 3035218028 S2ID:
      23edba4188492f39a7aefebbd7267a6a8d9ddb74.

[29] Reza Ghoddoosian, Isht Dwivedi, Nakul Agarwal, Chiho Choi, and Behzad Dariush. Weakly-
      supervised online action segmentation in multi-view instructional videos. In Proceedings of
      the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 13780–13790,
      2023.

[30] Rohit Girdhar, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Zhuang Liu, Mannat Singh, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala,
      Armand Joulin, and Ishan Misra. Imagebind: One embedding space to bind them all. In CVPR,
      2023.

[31] Rohit Girdhar, Mannat Singh, Nikhila Ravi, Laurens van der Maaten, Armand Joulin, and
      Ishan Misra. Omnivore: A Single Model for Many Visual Modalities, March 2022.

[32] Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Rohit
      Girdhar, Jackson Hamburger, Hao Jiang, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, Miguel Martin, Tushar
      Nagarajan, Ilija Radosavovic, Santhosh Kumar Ramakrishnan, Fiona Ryan, Jayant Sharma,
      Michael Wray, Mengmeng Xu, Eric Zhongcong Xu, Chen Zhao, Siddhant Bansal, Dhruv
      Batra, Vincent Cartillier, Sean Crane, Tien Do, Morrie Doulaty, Akshay Erapalli, Christoph
      Feichtenhofer, Adriano Fragomeni, Qichen Fu, Abrham Gebreselasie, Cristina Gonzalez,
      James Hillis, Xuhua Huang, Yifei Huang, Wenqi Jia, Weslie Khoo, Jachym Kolar, Satwik
      Kottur, Anurag Kumar, Federico Landini, Chao Li, Yanghao Li, Zhenqiang Li, Karttikeya
      Mangalam, Raghava Modhugu, Jonathan Munro, Tullie Murrell, Takumi Nishiyasu, Will
      Price, Paola Ruiz Puentes, Merey Ramazanova, Leda Sari, Kiran Somasundaram, Audrey
      Southerland, Yusuke Sugano, Ruijie Tao, Minh Vo, Yuchen Wang, Xindi Wu, Takuma Yagi,
      Ziwei Zhao, Yunyi Zhu, Pablo Arbelaez, David Crandall, Dima Damen, Giovanni Maria
      Farinella, Christian Fuegen, Bernard Ghanem, Vamsi Krishna Ithapu, C. V. Jawahar, Hanbyul
      Joo, Kris Kitani, Haizhou Li, Richard Newcombe, Aude Oliva, Hyun Soo Park, James M. Rehg,
      Yoichi Sato, Jianbo Shi, Mike Zheng Shou, Antonio Torralba, Lorenzo Torresani, Mingfei Yan,
      and Jitendra Malik. Ego4D: Around the World in 3,000 Hours of Egocentric Video. arXiv,
      October 2021.

[33] Chunhui Gu, Chen Sun, Sudheendra Vijayanarasimhan, Caroline Pantofaru, David A. Ross,
      George Toderici, Yeqing Li, Susanna Ricco, Rahul Sukthankar, Cordelia Schmid, and Jitendra
      Malik. Ava: A video dataset of spatio-temporally localized atomic visual actions. 2018
      IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 6047–6056, 2017.

[34] Kensho Hara, Hirokatsu Kataoka, and Yutaka Satoh. Learning Spatio-Temporal Features with
      3D Residual Networks for Action Recognition, August 2017.

[35] Sanjay Haresh, Sateesh Kumar, Huseyin Coskun, Shahram N. Syed, Andrey Konin, M. Zeeshan
      Zia, and Quoc-Huy Tran. Learning by aligning videos in time. In 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference
      on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 5544–5554, 2021.

[36] Bradley Hayes and Brian Scassellati. Autonomously constructing hierarchical task networks
      for planning and human-robot collaboration. In 2016 IEEE International Conference on
      Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 5469–5476, 2016.

[37] Rishi Hazra, Brian Chen, Akshara Rai, Nitin Kamra, and Ruta Desai. Egotv: Egocentric
      task verification from natural language task descriptions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
      International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pages 15417–15429, October 2023.

[38] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep Residual Learning for Image
      Recognition. arXiv, December 2015.

[39] Lisa Anne Hendricks, Bryan C. Russell, Eli Shechtman, Josef Sivic, Oliver Wang, and Trevor
      Darrell. Localizing Moments in Video with Temporal Language. Conference on Empirical
      Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1380–1390, January 2018. ARXIV_ID:
      1809.01337 MAG ID: 2891456603 S2ID: 0b1ff82db09672656157874718860bee942483cf.

                                                         12
[40] Henghui Zhao, Isma Hadji, Nikita Dvornik, K. Derpanis, R. Wildes, and A. Jepson. P3IV:
      Probabilistic Procedure Planning from Instructional Videos with Weak Supervision. Computer
      Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.

[41] Honglu Zhou, Roberto Mart’in-Mart’in, M. Kapadia, S. Savarese, and Juan Carlos Niebles.
      Procedure-Aware Pretraining for Instructional Video Understanding. arXiv.org, 2023.
      ARXIV_ID: 2303.18230 S2ID: a6805beab8d036362ea1719a8801631ed59916fc.

[42] De-An Huang, Li Fei-Fei, and Juan Carlos Niebles. Connectionist temporal modeling for
      weakly supervised action labeling. CoRR, abs/1607.08584, 2016.

[43] Islam, Md Mohaiminul and Bertasius, Gedas. Long Movie Clip Classification with State-
      Space Video Models. European Conference on Computer Vision, April 2022. ARXIV_ID:
      2204.01692 MAG ID: 4286768340 S2ID: 9226ae23b95b3f6891461e086d910ffeb7ac448a.

[44] Youngkyoon Jang, Brian Sullivan, Casimir Ludwig, Iain Gilchrist, Dima Damen, and Walterio
      Mayol-Cuevas. Epic-tent: An egocentric video dataset for camping tent assembly. In Proceed-
      ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) Workshops, Oct
      2019.

[45] Jiahao Zhang, A. Cherian, Yanbin Liu, Yizhak Ben-Shabat, Cristián Rodríguez, and Stephen
      Gould. Aligning Step-by-Step Instructional Diagrams to Video Demonstrations. arXiv.org,
      2023. ARXIV_ID: 2303.13800 S2ID: f517037c99311519c1134e87ac9cdbb5f07e8ce0.

[46] Y.-G. Jiang, J. Liu, A. Roshan Zamir, G. Toderici, I. Laptev, M. Shah, and R. Sukthankar.
      THUMOS challenge: Action recognition with a large number of classes. http://crcv.ucf.
      edu/THUMOS14/, 2014.

[47] Junnan Li, Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Shafiq R. Joty, Caiming
      Xiong, and S. Hoi. Align before Fuse: Vision and Language Representation Learning with Mo-
      mentum Distillation. Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. ARXIV_ID: 2107.07651
      S2ID: b82c5f9efdb2ae56baa084ca41aeddd8a665c1d1.

[48] Junru Wu, Yi Liang, Feng Han, Hassan Akbari, Zhangyang Wang, and Cong
      Yu. Scaling Multimodal Pre-Training via Cross-Modality Gradient Harmoniza-
      tion. Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. ARXIV_ID: 2211.02077 S2ID:
      a5f4018833c6327b6dcb1f4001fcbe2e76743f3b.

[49] Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Hierarchical learning in stochastic domains: Preliminary results. In
      Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on International Conference on Machine
      Learning, ICML’93, page 167–173, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1993. Morgan Kaufmann
      Publishers Inc.

[50] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization, January
      2017.

[51] Hilde Kuehne, Ali Arslan, and Thomas Serre. The language of actions: Recovering the syntax
      and semantics of goal-directed human activities. In 2014 IEEE Conference on Computer
      Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 780–787, 2014.

[52] Hilde Kuehne, Ali Bilgin Arslan, and Thomas Serre. The Language of Actions: Recovering
      the Syntax and Semantics of Goal-Directed Human Activities. 2014 IEEE Conference on
      Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 780–787, June 2014. MAG ID: 2099614498
      S2ID: 185f078accb52be4faa13e4f470a9909cc6fe814.

[53] Jun Li, Peng Lei, Peng Lei, and Sinisa Todorovic. Weakly Supervised Energy-
      Based Learning for Action Segmentation. arXiv: Computer Vision and Pattern
      Recognition, September 2019. ARXIV_ID: 1909.13155 MAG ID: 2977079317 S2ID:
      4950245c628b041c497577516a5da71d59cdc377.

[54] Yin Li, Miao Liu, and James M. Rehg. In the eye of the beholder: Gaze and actions in first
      person video. CoRR, abs/2006.00626, 2020.

                                                         13
[55] Bin Lin, Bin Zhu, Yang Ye, Munan Ning, Peng Jin, and Li Yuan. Video-llava: Learning united
      visual representation by alignment before projection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.10122, 2023.

[56] Neelu Madan, Nicolae-Catalin Ristea, Radu Tudor Ionescu, Kamal Nasrollahi, Fahad Shahbaz
      Khan, Thomas B. Moeslund, and Mubarak Shah. Self-Supervised Masked Convolutional
      Transformer Block for Anomaly Detection, September 2022. arXiv:2209.12148 [cs].

[57] Madeline Chantry Schiappa and Y. Rawat. SVGraph: Learning Semantic Graphs from Instruc-
      tional Videos. IEEE International Conference on Multimedia Big Data, 2022. ARXIV_ID:
      2207.08001 S2ID: ecb4f7ab11c4dae31dc895d54b788946248e0862.

[58] Jonathan Malmaud, Jonathan Huang, Vivek Rathod, Nick Johnston, Andrew Rabinovich, Kevin
      Murphy, Kevin Murphy, Kevin Murphy, and Kevin Murphy. What’s Cookin’? Interpreting
      Cooking Videos using Text, Speech and Vision. North American Chapter of the Association
      for Computational Linguistics, pages 143–152, January 2015. ARXIV_ID: 1503.01558 MAG
      ID: 2964040984 S2ID: 59ba3b1b31e2f8adb18fb886ad3fc087081c0e38.

[59] Weichao Mao, Ruta Desai, Michael Louis Iuzzolino, and Nitin Kamra. Action dynamics task
      graphs for learning plannable representations of procedural tasks, 2023.

[60] Antoine Miech, Dimitri Zhukov, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Makarand Tapaswi, Ivan Laptev, and
      Josef Sivic. HowTo100M: Learning a Text-Video Embedding by Watching Hundred Million
      Narrated Video Clips. In ICCV, 2019.

[61] Pedro Morgado, Nuno Vasconcelos, Ishan Misra, and Ishan Misra. Audio-Visual
      Instance Discrimination with Cross-Modal Agreement. Computer Vision and Pat-
      tern Recognition, April 2020. ARXIV_ID: 2004.12943 MAG ID: 3020933450 S2ID:
      4f9a4afc0ba500d839f7ee245513af9b87add8be.

[62] Narasimhan, Medhini, Nagrani, Arsha, Sun, Chen, Rubinstein, Michael, Darrell,
      Trevor, Rohrbach, Anna, and Schmid, Cordelia. TL;DW? Summarizing Instructional
      Videos with Task Relevance & Cross-Modal Saliency. European Conference on Com-
      puter Vision, August 2022. ARXIV_ID: 2208.06773 MAG ID: 4292102688 S2ID:
      8742e15fb4817f88fef78d9148fd83bc00a881b5.

[63] Ram Nevatia, Tao Zhao, and Somboon Hongeng. Hierarchical Language-based Rep-
      resentation of Events in Video Streams. 2003 Conference on Computer Vision and
      Pattern Recognition Workshop, 4:39–39, June 2003. MAG ID: 2151206977 S2ID:
      61d35cb5fcd823b98bae474b1ea02467c61aa3cb.

[64] Nikita Dvornik, Isma Hadji, K. Derpanis, Animesh Garg, and A. Jepson. Drop-
      DTW: Aligning Common Signal Between Sequences While Dropping Outliers.
      Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. ARXIV_ID: 2108.11996 S2ID:
      802495973e50115cdf10a72d466dd89a2d6ce5bc.

[65] Nikita Dvornik, Isma Hadji, Ran Zhang, K. Derpanis, Animesh Garg, R. Wildes,
      and A. Jepson. StepFormer: Self-supervised Step Discovery and Localiza-
      tion in Instructional Videos. arXiv.org, 2023. ARXIV_ID: 2304.13265 S2ID:
      8b23d85bc8cc5602bf7114ce0e8232aee2263c2b.

[66] Dim P. Papadopoulos, Enrique Mora, Nadiia Chepurko, Kuan Wei Huang, Ferda Ofli, and
      Antonio Torralba. Learning program representations for food images and cooking recipes,
      2022.

[67] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan,
      Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative
      style, high-performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing
      systems, 32, 2019.

[68] Rohith Peddi, Saurabh, Ayush Abhay Shrivastava, Parag Singla, and Vibhav Gogate. Towards
      unbiased and robust spatio-temporal scene graph generation and anticipation, 2024.

                                                         14
[69] Rohith Peddi, Saksham Singh, Saurabh, Parag Singla, and Vibhav Gogate. Towards scene
      graph anticipation. In Aleš Leonardis, Elisa Ricci, Stefan Roth, Olga Russakovsky, Torsten
      Sattler, and Gül Varol, editors, Computer Vision – ECCV 2024, pages 159–175, Cham, 2025.
      Springer Nature Switzerland.

[70] Mingtao Pei, Yunde Jia, and Song-Chun Zhu. Parsing video events with goal inference and
      intent prediction. Vision, pages 487–494, November 2011. MAG ID: 2045792079 S2ID:
      054e8684578eb6f85cabcfb31ada42a9b7ec8fd6.

[71] A. J. Piergiovanni, Anelia Angelova, Alexander Toshev, and Michael S. Ryoo. Adversarial
      generative grammars for human activity prediction. In Andrea Vedaldi, Horst Bischof, Thomas
      Brox, and Jan-Michael Frahm, editors, Computer Vision – ECCV 2020, pages 507–523, Cham,
      2020. Springer International Publishing.

[72] Po-Yao Huang, Vasu Sharma, Hu Xu, Chaitanya K. Ryali, Haoqi Fan, Yanghao
      Li, Shang-Wen Li, Gargi Ghosh, J. Malik, and Christoph Feichtenhofer. MAViL:
      Masked Audio-Video Learners. arXiv.org, 2022. ARXIV_ID: 2212.08071 S2ID:
      8fa9db70b22b68534befe05bd75652713c49879f.

[73] Yicheng Qian, Weixin Luo, Dongze Lian, Xu Tang, Peilin Zhao, and Shenghua Gao. SVIP:
      sequence verification for procedures in videos. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
      and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, June 18-24, 2022, pages
      19858–19870. IEEE, 2022.

[74] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya
      Sutskever. Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision. In Proceedings of the
      40th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’23. JMLR.org, 2023.

[75] Francesco Ragusa, Antonino Furnari, Salvatore Livatino, Salvatore Livatino, and Gio-
      vanni Maria Farinella. The MECCANO Dataset: Understanding Human-Object Interactions
      from Egocentric Videos in an Industrial-like Domain. arXiv: Computer Vision and Pattern
      Recognition, 2020.

[76] Shuhuai Ren, Linli Yao, Shicheng Li, Xu Sun, and Lu Hou. Timechat: A time-sensitive
      multimodal large language model for long video understanding. ArXiv, abs/2312.02051, 2023.

[77] Nicolae-Catalin Ristea, Neelu Madan, Radu Tudor Ionescu, Kamal Nasrollahi, Fahad Shahbaz
      Khan, Thomas B. Moeslund, and Mubarak Shah. Self-Supervised Predictive Convolutional
      Attentive Block for Anomaly Detection, March 2022. arXiv:2111.09099 [cs].

[78] Marcus Rohrbach, Anna Rohrbach, Michaela Regneri, Sikandar Amin, Mykhaylo Andriluka,
      Manfred Pinkal, and Bernt Schiele. Recognizing fine-grained and composite activities using
      hand-centric features and script data. International Journal of Computer Vision, pages 1–28,
      2015.

[79] Sarkar, Pritam and Etemad, Ali. XKD: Cross-modal Knowledge Distillation
      with Domain Alignment for Video Representation Learning. Cornell University
      - arXiv, November 2022. ARXIV_ID: 2211.13929 MAG ID: 4310282783 S2ID:
      8e3fb0a7cbbe27ebbab9833cff2a60b0ed61e516.

[80] Tim J. Schoonbeek, Tim Houben, Hans Onvlee, Peter H. N. de With, and Fons van der Sommen.
      IndustReal: A dataset for procedure step recognition handling execution errors in egocentric
      videos in an industrial-like setting, 2024.

[81] Fadime Sener and Angela Yao. Zero-shot anticipation for instructional activities. In 2019
      IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV 2019, Seoul, Korea (South),
      October 27 - November 2, 2019, pages 862–871. IEEE, 2019.

[82] Gunnar A. Sigurdsson, Gül Varol, X. Wang, Ali Farhadi, Ivan Laptev, and Abhinav Kumar
      Gupta. Hollywood in homes: Crowdsourcing data collection for activity understanding. In
      European Conference on Computer Vision, 2016.

                                                         15
[83] Sihan Chen, Xingjian He, Longteng Guo, Xinxin Zhu, Weining Wang, Jin-
      hui Tang, and Jing Liu. VALOR: Vision-Audio-Language Omni-Perception Pre-
      training Model and Dataset. arXiv.org, 2023. ARXIV_ID: 2304.08345 S2ID:
      03755613d50e1958a97bfaad2efb976f786fbb70.

[84] Gurkirt Singh, Suman Saha, Michael Sapienza, Philip H. S. Torr, and Fabio Cuzzolin. Online
      real-time multiple spatiotemporal action localisation and prediction. In Proceedings of the
      IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), Oct 2017.

[85] Sixun Dong, Huazhang Hu, Dongze Lian, Weixin Luo, Yichen Qian, and
      Shenghua Gao. Weakly Supervised Video Representation Learning with Unaligned
      Text for Sequential Videos. arXiv.org, 2023. ARXIV_ID: 2303.12370 S2ID:
      bb41cacf622a165c6e30f90be41439ea0537474c.

[86] Soucˇek, Tomáš, Alayrac, Jean-Baptiste, Miech, Antoine, Laptev, Ivan, and Sivic, Josef.
      Multi-Task Learning of Object State Changes from Uncurated Videos. Cornell Univer-
      sity - arXiv, November 2022. ARXIV_ID: 2211.13500 MAG ID: 4310275288 S2ID:
      64066a83d282c139cd418213fa561002bfa36cf1.

[87] Sebastian Stein and Stephen J. McKenna. Combining embedded accelerometers with computer
      vision for recognizing food preparation activities. In UbiComp ’13: Proceedings of the 2013
      ACM international joint conference on Pervasive and ubiquitous computing, pages 729–738.
      Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, September 2013.

[88] Sun, Yuchong, Xue, Hongwei, Song, Ruihua, Liu, Bei, Yang, Huan, and Fu, Jianlong. Long-
      Form Video-Language Pre-Training with Multimodal Temporal Contrastive Learning. Cornell
      University - arXiv, October 2022. ARXIV_ID: 2210.06031 MAG ID: 4306177974 S2ID:
      2adfa4e2e9e365b3dc6eca45fcec4ecbb82e1433.

[89] Yansong Tang, Dajun Ding, Dajun Ding, Dajun Ding, Yongming Rao, Yu Zheng, Danyang
      Zhang, Lili Zhao, Jiwen Lu, and Jie Zhou. COIN: A Large-Scale Dataset for Comprehensive
      Instructional Video Analysis. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, June 2019.

[90] Tengda Han, Weidi Xie, and Andrew Zisserman. Temporal Alignment Networks for Long-
      term Video. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022. ARXIV_ID: 2204.02968 S2ID:
      0e76cf252fcc119ad87d336d439e667a9200a05c.

[91] Zhan Tong, Yibing Song, Jue Wang, and Limin Wang. Videomae: Masked autoencoders are
      data-efficient learners for self-supervised video pre-training. Neural Information Processing
      Systems, 2022.

[92] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timo-
      thée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez,
      Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation
      language models, 2023.

[93] Xin Wang, Taein Kwon, Mahdi Rad, Bowen Pan, Ishani Chakraborty, Sean Andrist, Dan
      Bohus, Ashley Feniello, Bugra Tekin, Felipe Vieira Frujeri, Neel Joshi, and Marc Pollefeys.
      Holoassist: an egocentric human interaction dataset for interactive ai assistants in the real
      world. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
      pages 20270–20281, October 2023.

[94] Weizhe Liu, Bugra Tekin, Huseyin Coskun, Vibhav Vineet, P. Fua, and M. Pollefeys. Learning
      to Align Sequential Actions in the Wild. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021.

[95] Xin Hong, Yanyan Lan, Liang Pang, J. Guo, and Xueqi Cheng. Visual

Transformation Telling.  arXiv.org, 2023.  ARXIV_ID: 2305.01928 S2ID:

10ae25755d9aa17ebc9934cb4c4208c969c4e35c.

[96] Yoko Yamakata, Shinsuke Mori, and John Carroll. English recipe flow graph corpus. In
      Proceedings of the Twelfth Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, pages 5187–5194,
      Marseille, France, May 2020. European Language Resources Association.

                         16
 [97] Yichen Qian, Weixin Luo, Dongze Lian, Xu Tang, P. Zhao, and Shenghua Gao. SVIP:
        Sequence VerIfication for Procedures in Videos. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
        2021. ARXIV_ID: 2112.06447 S2ID: 347e9ce9465e6d9582adbb1c0658d8c26179d0bc.

 [98] Yizhen Chen, Jie Wang, Lijian Lin, Zhongang Qi, Jin Ma, and Ying Shan. Tagging be-
        fore Alignment: Integrating Multi-Modal Tags for Video-Text Retrieval. arXiv.org, 2023.
       ARXIV_ID: 2301.12644 S2ID: 2e9525ebe76a1d37533539ad2f560b1b453e66f6.

 [99] Yue Yang, Artemis Panagopoulou, Qing Lyu, Li Zhang, Mark Yatskar, and Chris Callison-
        Burch. Visual Goal-Step Inference using wikiHow. Conference on Empirical Methods in
       Natural Language Processing, January 2021. ARXIV_ID: 2104.05845 MAG ID: 4206418986
        S2ID: 7c9e1282124c7c161962df3b78c1c3116deffdfd.

[100] Yue Zhao, Ishan Misra, Philipp Krahenbuhl, and Rohit Girdhar. Learning Video Repre-
        sentations from Large Language Models. arXiv.org, 2022. ARXIV_ID: 2212.04501 S2ID:
        933b37b21e9d61139660088adb032ff3fdf56d86.

[101] Chen-Lin Zhang, Jianxin Wu, and Yin Li. Actionformer: Localizing moments of actions with
        transformers. In Shai Avidan, Gabriel J. Brostow, Moustapha Cissé, Giovanni Maria Farinella,
        and Tal Hassner, editors, Computer Vision - ECCV 2022 - 17th European Conference, Tel
       Aviv, Israel, October 23-27, 2022, Proceedings, Part IV, volume 13664 of Lecture Notes in
       Computer Science, pages 492–510. Springer, 2022.

[102] Zhao, Xueliang, Wang, Yuxuan, Tao, Chongyang, Wang, Chenshuo, and Zhao, Dongyan.
        Collaborative Reasoning on Multi-Modal Semantic Graphs for Video-Grounded Dialogue
        Generation. Cornell University - arXiv, October 2022. ARXIV_ID: 2210.12460 MAG ID:
       4307310837 S2ID: 256fd60c692ebe12fe2bbf65d46722f511aa3117.

[103] Luowei Zhou, Chenliang Xu, and Jason J. Corso. Towards Automatic Learning of Procedures
        from Web Instructional Videos. arXiv, March 2017.

[104] Luowei Zhou, Chenliang Xu, and Jason J. Corso. Towards automatic learning of procedures
        from web instructional videos. In Sheila A. McIlraith and Kilian Q. Weinberger, editors,
       Proceedings of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, (AAAI-18), the
       30th innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18), and the 8th AAAI Symposium
        on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-18), New Orleans, Louisiana, USA,
       February 2-7, 2018, pages 7590–7598. AAAI Press, 2018.

[105] Dimitri Zhukov, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Ramazan Gokberk Cinbis, David F. Fouhey, Ivan
        Laptev, and Josef Sivic. Cross-task weakly supervised learning from instructional videos.
        arXiv: Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, March 2019.

[106] Dimitri Zhukov, Dimitri Zhukov, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Ivan Laptev, and Josef Sivic.
        Learning Actionness via Long-Range Temporal Order Verification. European Con-
        ference on Computer Vision, pages 470–487, 2020. MAG ID: 3092639633 S2ID:
       1bcb053622ef73ccebbfce3d7a8663b15e0c33a8.

Checklist

       1. For all authors...
            (a) Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s
                contributions and scope? [Yes]
           (b) Did you describe the limitations of your work? [Yes]
            (c) Did you discuss any potential negative societal impacts of your work? [N/A]
           (d) Have you read the ethics review guidelines and ensured that your paper conforms to
                them? [Yes]

       2. If you are including theoretical results...
            (a) Did you state the full set of assumptions of all theoretical results? [N/A]
           (b) Did you include complete proofs of all theoretical results? [N/A]

                                                          17
3. If you ran experiments (e.g. for benchmarks)...
    (a) Did you include the code, data, and instructions needed to reproduce the main experi-
         mental results (either in the supplemental material or as a URL)? [Yes] They are part
         of this GitHub repo: CaptainCook4D
    (b) Did you specify all the training details (e.g., data splits, hyperparameters, how they
         were chosen)? [Yes] In Appendix B
    (c) Did you report error bars (e.g., with respect to the random seed after running experi-
         ments multiple times)? [Yes] In Appendix B
    (d) Did you include the total amount of compute and the type of resources used (e.g., type
         of GPUs, internal cluster, or cloud provider)? [Yes] In Appendix B

4. If you are using existing assets (e.g., code, data, models) or curating/releasing new assets...
    (a) If your work uses existing assets, did you cite the creators? [N/A]
    (b) Did you mention the license of the assets? [Yes]
    (c) Did you include any new assets either in the supplemental material or as a URL? [Yes]
         They can be accessed from this GitHub repo: CaptainCook4D
    (d) Did you discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose data you’re
         using/curating? [Yes] In Section 3.1
    (e) Did you discuss whether the data you are using/curating contains personally identifiable
         information or offensive content? [Yes] We discussed this in Section 3.1. Our data
         does not contain personally identifiable information.

5. If you used crowdsourcing or conducted research with human subjects...
    (a) Did you include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if
         applicable? [Yes] In Appendix C
    (b) Did you describe any potential participant risks, with links to Institutional Review
         Board (IRB) approvals, if applicable? [Yes] In Section 3.1 and Appendix C
    (c) Did you include the estimated hourly wage paid to participants and the total amount
         spent on participant compensation? [Yes] In Appendix C

                                                   18
Appendices

A Overview          20

A.1 Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

A.2 Data Splits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

B Benchmarking      22

B.1 Zero-Shot Error & Error Category Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

B.2 Anomaly Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35

B.3 Supervised Error Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36

B.4 Supervised Early Error Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39

B.5 Multi-Step Localization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41

B.6 Procedure Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42

C Data              43

C.1 Data Collection Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43

C.2 Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50

C.3 Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52

                19
A Overview

A.1 Motivation

Procedural Datasets. We present our motivation to collect a new dataset with errors. Current
datasets that study procedural tasks, such as GTEA [21], Breakfast [51], CMU-MMAC [13], 50Salads
[87], COIN [89], CrossTask [105], ProceL [17], EgoProceL[3], Assembly101 [19], and HowTo100M
[60], encompass temporal variation in the order of the steps performed. However, these datasets are
predominantly sourced from crowd-sourced online platforms, resulting in the videos often containing
drastically different steps, with alterations impacting more than 30% of the content. Our interest lies
in understanding errors induced by deviating from the given instruction set. To this end, we require
two types of videos: normal ones that closely follow the instructions and error videos that depict
deviations. Moreover, we aim to capture these videos from an ego-centric perspective to minimize the
occlusions typical in third-person videos. We are primarily interested in understanding errors when
the objects under the interaction continuously change shape and colour during a procedural activity.

                                                                                                                                                           STO
                                                                                                                                                               R

Recent Progress. Error recognition in procedural activities has received significantEtraction, leading
to the proposal of new datasets with errors [93, 29, 37, 80]. Although they aim to identify errors
in procedural activities, they focus on tasks related to assembly and disassembly. The activities
involve objects with constant shapes and colors, which lack the desired characteristics. The
absence of such specific video resources led us to curate a dataset (Fig. 8) embodying all our desired
characteristics. By focusing on cooking activities with desired characteristics, our dataset can be used
to develop easily transferable algorithms for other sensitive domains, such as medicine and chemistry.

      Recipe Task Gr aph                     Sampled Topological Or der s                                       Recipe Execution Or der s

START                               TO1:                                            INSTRUCTION     Nor mal :
                                    TO2:                                            NORMAL STEP     Nor mal :
                    SAMPLE          TO3:                                            ERROR STEP      Er r or :
                                    TO4:                                                             Er r or :
                                    TO5:                                   PERFORM                  Er r or :
                                    TO6:
                                                                                           NORMAL
                                                                                         RECORDING

                                                                                             ERROR
                                                                                         RECORDING

                                                                                                    PO6:

(a)Hololens2  ( b) Par t i ci pant   (c)Hololens2   (d)Hololens2              (e)Hololens2          (f)Hololens2 RGB  (g)GoPro RGB
 and GoPro                          3D Hand Joints      Depth              Camera Trajector y

Figure 8: Overview. Top: We constructed task graphs for the selected recipes. These graphs facilitated
sampling partial orders (cooking steps) that participants followed to perform. During the execution
of some of these steps, participants induced errors that are both intentional and unintentional in
nature. Bottom: On the left, we present the sensors employed for data collection, and on the right, we
describe the details of the modalities of the data collected while the participant performs the recipe.

In the following sections, we will start by explaining how to use the data, including details about the
structured splits of the dataset. We will then discuss comprehensive results and various analyses of
the tasks we have benchmarked. Lastly, we will describe our data collection and annotation processes
involving three stages: (a) Data collection planning, (b) Data collection, and (c) Data processing.

                                                    20
A.2 Data Splits
We created diverse splits for training models on the proposed dataset where each split is based on
a specific criteria ensuring diversity in the train, validation and test subsets according to it. This
approach enables models to concentrate on different facets of the data. The splits are categorized as
follows: (1) Recording Environment (E), (2) Recording Person (P), (3) Recipes (Re), (4) Recordings
(R), (5) Steps (S), and (6) Recording Type (Rt).
(1) Environment (E). Our dataset comprises data collected from ten different environments, with a
larger proportion of recordings sourced from five of these environments. We used this information to
strategically divide the dataset. Recordings from these five environments were included in both the
training and validation sets, while recordings from the remaining environments were allocated to the
test set. We ensured a consistent balance of normal and error recordings across all three sets.
(2) Persons (P). Eight participants compiled our dataset, each recording an equal number of
videos. To facilitate a balanced distribution, we designed a split that includes recordings from two
participants—who performed all the recipes—in the test set. The recordings from the remaining
participants were divided between the training and validation sets.
(3) Recipes (Re). We meticulously divided 24 selected recipes into training, validation, and test
sets based on the specific skills required for each recipe. By identifying all the essential skills needed
to execute these recipes, we ensured that each set included recipes that necessitate applying these
skills. This strategic division facilitates learning tasks that involve skill transfer.
(4) Recordings (R). We categorize all recordings of a recipe into training, validation, and test sets
according to a specified ratio. This split is generated randomly and varies with each iteration.
(5) Steps (S). We compile a comprehensive dataset consisting of video segments that correspond
to the steps of all recordings. This dataset is then divided into training, validation, and test splits,
ensuring that steps from each recording are represented across all three splits.
(6) Recording Type (Rt). Tasks that require a semantic understanding of errors employ methods
that differentiate between normal and error recordings. The models can be trained using only normal
recordings to learn the baseline behaviour and then applied to recognize errors in recordings.

                                                          21
B Benchmarking

We present comprehensive evaluation results and analyses for our proposed dataset on several tasks:

       1. Error Recognition: This includes evaluations under two different settings:
              • Zero-Shot:
                  – Error Recognition
                  – Error Category Recognition
                  – Anomaly Detection
              • Supervised:
                  – Error Recognition
                  – Early Error Recognition

       2. Multi-Step Localization
       3. Procedure Learning

B.1 Zero-Shot Error & Error Category Recognition

Error Recognition demands an accurate interpretation of actions and their consequences. This entails
developing models that can semantically understand the progression of events during an activity
and also assess the quality of the actions observed. Recently, Vision-Language Models (VLMs)
have shown great promise in visual reasoning by combining effective visual analysis with the strong
common-sense reasoning abilities of Large Language Models (LLMs). Therefore, our goal is to test
the ability of recently proposed VLMs to recognize errors in video recordings of procedural activities.

Leveraging the prompt-and-predict paradigm we proposed two variants18 {V1, V2} for error recogni-
tion. We set up the Zero-Shot Error Recognition task as a Video Question Answering (VQA) problem.
Our proposed variants {V1, V2} primarily focused on the generation of task-specific questions, while
relying on the existing state-of-the-art pre-trained VLMs for visual interpretation and the reasoning
ability required (specific to visual interpretation) to answer the generated task-specific questions.

       VARIANT-1 VARIANT-2                                                  ERROR CATEGORY
        RECIPE TASK GRAPH                                                   QUERY TEMPLATES

                 S                                        Llama 3

Video                                              Video

STEP QUERY                                                      STEP QUERY  ENGINEERED
  PROMPTS                                                         PROMPTS
                                                                               FROZEN
           VLM                                   VLM
                                                                                QUERY
                          NORMAL (0)      ERROR (1)                          TEMPLATES

                                                                            RECIPE STEP

                                                                            STEP QUERY
                                                                               PROMPT
                                                                                ERROR

                                                                             CATEGORY
                                                                            STEP QUERY

                                                                               PROMPT

                                  Figure 9: ZeroShotER evaluation pipeline of VLMs

Our proposed variants are distinguished by their use of single-prompt and multi-prompt approaches,
as defined in the literature on prompt engineering. Specifically, in V1, we leverage the task graphs
and error descriptions provided as part of annotations to construct questions (a single question
prompt specific to each step of the recipe) that enquire about the completion of a recipe step in the

   18We only probe the textual inputs, leaving the visual interpretation aspects of the VLMs unchanged.

                                      22
procedural activity videos. In V2, instead of a single-prompt (more general questions), we adopt a
prompt-ensembling strategy (more specific questions) to recognize errors that occur in recordings.

Our V2 can be understood as follows: Error Recognition as a task requires identification of all errors
that occur in procedural activity videos. Since the space of the possible errors that can potentially
occur for each procedural activity is very large and combinatorial in nature, tasking a VLM to enquire
about all possible errors through more general questions leads to significantly low performance
(can be observed through numbers of V1 in Table 7). To address this, as illustrated in Figure 9, we
leveraged the structured knowledge about the categories of errors that can occur while executing a
procedural activity and crafted targeted question prompts. This strategy not only guides VLMs to
answer more specific questions, thereby improving the performance scores (refer Table 7) but also
aids in developing a systematic framework for building error recognition models using VLMs.

VLM            Variant Acc  P  R  F1

Video-LLaVa [55] V1  64.3 34.2 3.9 6.7

               V2 52.85 36.3 49.3 41.8

TimeChat [76]  V1    65.0 51.11 1.15 2.26

               V2    43.5 34.38 69.7 46.1

                                   Table 7: ZeroShotER evaluation results.

In subsequent sections, we detail the two proposed variants, {V1, V2}, including examples of the
crafted question prompts for {V1, V2}. We also present our evaluation results (using standard binary
classification metrics) for the tasks of Error Recognition and Error Category Recognition. We note
that although we present evaluation results for two open-source VLMs, Video-LLaVa and TimeChat,
our framework can be easily extended to closed-source VLMs such as GPT-4V and GeminiPro.

                     23
B.1.1 Variant-1 (V1):

RECIPE TASK GRAPH      Video
             S

Figure 10: ZeroShotERV1. We outline the methodology for the proposed variant V1 as follows:
Initially, we integrated the raw textual descriptions of steps extracted from task graphs into an
engineered prompt template to create a single-question prompt specific to each step of the recipe.
This prompt, along with the corresponding video, is inputted into a VLM. We analyze the responses
generated from the VLM to obtain its predictions corresponding to each step of the recipe.

Task. In Figure 10, we present overview of the proposed method. The two important components of
V1 include (a) An engineered prompt template that is specific to the chosen VLM and (b) A response
processing unit. For engineering the prompt template, we employed the following methodology:

        – Inspired by the Chain of Thought prompting strategy, We formulated a list of templates that
           can potentially be used for recognizing errors in procedural activity recordings.

        – We selected a diverse set of videos representing every recipe type included in the dataset.
        – We executed our proposed pipeline with all the prompt templates on a selected set of videos

           and chose the best-performing prompt template corresponding to each VLM.
We noticed that although we craft the template to generate the response in a specific format, the
response generated by VLM often follows a different format; thus, we included a response processing
unit to convert the generated response into a preferred format. We presented results in Table 7.
In the subsequent sections, we present the engineered templates (tailored to the specific choice of
VLMs) used to construct the question prompts for each step followed by a few examples of the steps
sampled from the recipes included in the proposed dataset. We built our candidates for the templates
utilizing the examples provided by the authors of employed VLMs, Video-LLaVa and TimeChat.

                                                          24
Prompt Template. Following are the engineered prompt templates corresponding to the VLMs
       – Video-LLaVa: ASSISTANT: {Did, Is, Does, . . . } the person {perform, execute, doing, . . . }
          the step recipe step from the recipe recipe ?
       – TimeChat: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following
          question: {Did, Is} the person {perform, doing} the step recipe step ? Return the answer in
          the format of Yes or No.

Examples:

       Recipe: Cucumber Raita
          Step: In a mixing bowl, whisk 1 cup of chilled curd until smooth. Use fresh homemade
                  or packaged curd
         VLM: Video-LLaVa

      Prompt: Did the person whisk 1 cup of chilled fresh homemade or packaged curd until
                  smooth while performing the Cucumber Raita recipe?

         VLM: TimeChat
      Prompt: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following

                  question: Did the person whisk 1 cup of chilled fresh homemade or packaged
                  curd until smooth? Return the answer in the format of Yes or No.

       Recipe: Spiced Hot Chocolate
          Step: Add 2 pieces of chocolate to the mug
         VLM: Video-LLaVa

      Prompt: Does the person add 2 pieces of chocolate to the mug while performing Spiced
                  Hot Chocolate recipe?

         VLM: TimeChat
      Prompt: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following

                  question: Does the person add 2 pieces of chocolate to the mug? Return the
                  answer in the format of Yes or No.

       Recipe: Tomato Mozzarella Salad
          Step: Rinse a tomato
         VLM: Video-LLaVa

      Prompt: Did the person rinse one tomato?

         VLM: TimeChat
      Prompt: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following

                  question: Did the person rinse one tomato? Return the answer in the format of
                  Yes or No.

                                                          25
B.1.2 Variant-2:

RECIPE TASK GRAPH

           S       ERROR CATEGORY QUERY

                   TEMPLATES

                                                                                       ERROR (1)

                                                                           OR

VARIANT-2                                              V VLM RESPONSE PROCESSING UNIT

                   Llama 3

                                                                                       NORMAL (0)

                                                                          Video

Figure 11: ZeroShotERV2. We outline the methodology for the proposed variant V2 as follows:
Instead of a single-question prompt for each recipe step, we create seven question prompts, each
tailored to a specific error category. Specifically, we engineered seven query templates, each
corresponding to an error category. We fed these templates along with the description of each recipe
step to Llama3 to generate seven tailored query prompts. We pass these error category-specific query
prompts along with the videos to VLMs. We process the response generated by VLMs and apply an
OR operation on processed responses of question prompts to obtain the final prediction for each step.

Task. In Figure 11, we present overview of the proposed variant V2. Important components of V2
are (a) Engineered error-category-specific query prompt templates tailored to VLM and (b) Final
prediction generation. For engineering error-category-specific query prompt templates we followed:

       – Inspired by the Chain of Thought prompting strategy, We formulated a list of templates that
          can be used for recognizing errors corresponding to each error category in recordings.

       – We selected a diverse set of videos representing every recipe type included in the dataset.

       – We executed our proposed pipeline using all error category-specific query prompt templates
          on a chosen set of videos. From these, we identified and selected the best-performing error
          category-specific query prompts for each VLM. We presented evaluation results in Table 7.

       – We note that as an intermediate step, we also solve the Error Category Recognition task.

                  Table 8: Error Category Recognition evaluation results.

                   Error Category VLM                  P R F1 Acc

                   Order Error           Video-LLaVA 16.3 35.3 22.3 65.5

                                         TimeChat      17.2 6.25 9.2 82.6

                   Preparation Error     Video-LLaVA 7.7 12.3 9.5 84.2

                                         TimeChat      7.1 50.1 12.4 52.2

                   Measurement Error Video-LLaVA 0.0 0.0 0.0 93.7
                                         TimeChat      6.1 44.2 10.7 57.1

                   Technique Error       Video-LLaVA 11.1 0.4   0.7 90.9
                                                                0.6 89.9
                                         TimeChat      2.4 0.4

                   Missing Steps         Video-LLaVA 5.1    3.9 4.4 91.7
                                                            0.4 12.4 94.3
                                         TimeChat      2.2

                   Temperature Error Video-LLaVA 0.5 4.6 0.9 89.4
                                         TimeChat      0.6 6.2 1.2 88.4

                   Timing Error          Video-LLaVA 6.6 0.6 1.1 96.8

                                         TimeChat      3.0 17.6 5.1 80.5

                                                   26
Error Category Recognition. In Table 8, we presented evaluation results for the task Error
Category Recognition (namely, classify whether a video includes an error of a specific category or
not.) formulated as a binary classification problem. We used the standard binary classification metrics
to report the evaluation results. Specifically, we employed the following methodology:

       – We construct an error category-specific question prompt for each step (refer Fig. 11).
       – Using error annotations, we constructed error-category-specific label for each step.
       – We processed the generated responses by VLM to obtain the predictions for recipe steps.
       – We evaluated the obtained prediction using the labels constructed above. (refer Table 8).
Insights: (1) Video-LLaVa and TimeChat exhibit better performance on different categories of errors.
Thus suggesting a VLM ensemble as a natural extension to estimate final predictions. (2) Error
Category Recognition is a problem with heavy class imbalance, which can be inferred from the
reported scores of accuracy and the F1 metrics in Tab. 8. (3) The low scores indicate the difficulty of
the task, and we hope that these numbers will improve with more advanced closed-source VLMs.

                                                          27
Examples: We present category-specific templates and the corresponding examples.
    Error Category: Technique Error

      VLM: Video-LLaVa
  Template: ASSISTANT: To prepare recipe , the person {should, has, . . . } to {perform, execute,

               doing, . . . } the step recipe step . Answer with a yes or no, {Did, Does, Has, . . . }
               the person {carefully, precisely, . . . } {perform, execute, doing, . . . } the recipe step
               {without spilling, dropping, . . . }?
      VLM: TimeChat
  Template: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following
               question: To prepare recipe , the person {should, has, . . . } to {perform, execute,
               doing, . . . } the step recipe step . {Did, Does, Has, . . . } the person {carefully,
               precisely, . . . } {perform, execute, doing, . . . } the recipe step ? Return the answer
               in the format of Yes or No.

Question Prompts

       Recipe: Cucumber Raita
          Step: Add the chopped or grated cucumber to the whisked curd.
         VLM: Video-LLaVa

      Prompt: To prepare Cucumber Raita, the person has to add the chopped or grated cucumber
                  to the whisked curd. Answer with a yes or no, does the person carefully add
                  chopped or grated cucumber to the curd without spilling?

         VLM: TimeChat
      Prompt: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following

                  question: To prepare Cucumber Raita, the person has to add chopped or grated
                  cucumber to whisked curd. Does the person carefully add chopped or grated
                  cucumber to the curd? Return the answer in the format of Yes or No.

       Recipe: Spiced Hot Chocolate
          Step: Add 1/5 teaspoon cinnamon to the mug.
         VLM: Video-LLaVa

      Prompt: To prepare Spiced Hot Chocolate, the person should add 1/5 teaspoon of cinnamon
                  to the mug. Answer with a yes or no, did the person carefully add 1/5 teaspoon of
                  cinnamon to the mug without spilling?

         VLM: TimeChat
      Prompt: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following

                  question: To prepare Spiced Hot Chocolate, the person should add 1/5 teaspoon
                  of cinnamon to the mug. Does the person carefully add 1/5 teaspoon of cinnamon
                  to the mug without spilling? Return the answer in the format of Yes or No.

                                                          28
    Error Category: Preparation Error
      VLM: Video-LLaVa

  Template: ASSISTANT: {What, Which, . . . } {tool, ingredient, . . . } is used for recipe step to
               make recipe ? {Select, Choose, . . . } one of the options: {option 1, option 2 . . . }.

      VLM: TimeChat
  Template: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following

               question: {What, Which, . . . } {tool, ingredient, . . . } is used for recipe step to
               make recipe ? {Select, Choose, . . . } one of the options: {option 1, option 2 . . . }.

Question Prompts

       Recipe: Cucumber Raita
          Step: In a mixing bowl, whisk 1 cup of chilled curd until smooth. Use fresh homemade
                  or packaged curd.
         VLM: Video-LLaVa

      Prompt: What tool is used for making the chilled fresh homemade or packaged curd smooth
                  in a mixing bowl for making Cucumber Raita? Choose one of the options: (a)
                  whisker, (b) fork, (c) ladle, (d) knife.

         VLM: TimeChat
      Prompt: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following

                  question: What tool is used for making the chilled fresh homemade or packaged
                  curd smooth in a mixing bowl for making Cucumber Raita? Choose one of the
                  options: (a) whisker, (b) fork, (c) ladle, (d) knife.

       Recipe: Spiced Hot Chocolate
          Step: Microwave the contents of the mug for 1 minute.
         VLM: Video-LLaVa

      Prompt: Which tool is used to heat the contents of the mug to make Spiced Hot Chocolate?
                  Choose one of the options: (a) microwave, (b) saucepan, (c) toaster, (d) kettle.

         VLM: TimeChat
      Prompt: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following

                  question: Which tool is used to heat the contents of the mug to make Spiced Hot
                  Chocolate? Choose one of the options: (a) microwave, (b) saucepan, (c) toaster,
                  (d) kettle.

                                                          29
    Error Category: Order Error
      VLM: Video-LLaVa

  Template: ASSISTANT: {Did, Is, Does, . . . } the person {perform, execute, doing,
               . . . } the step recipe step to {cook, make} recipe ? {Has, Have, . . . } the
                previous recipe step(s) been {completed, performed, . . . } before recipe step ?

      VLM: TimeChat
  Template: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the fol-

               lowing question: {Did, Is, Does, . . . } the person {perform, execute, doing,
               . . . } the step recipe step to {cook, make} recipe ? {Has, Have, . . . } the
                previous recipe step(s) been {completed, performed, . . . } before recipe step ?
               Return the answer in the format of Yes or No.

Question Prompts

       Recipe: Cucumber Raita
          Step: Peel the cucumber.
         VLM: Video-LLaVa

      Prompt: Did the person peel the cucumber to make Cucumber Raita? Has 1 medium sized
                  cucumber been rinsed before peeling the cucumber?

         VLM: TimeChat
      Prompt: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following

                  question: Did the person peel the cucumber to make Cucumber Raita? Has 1
                  medium sized cucumber been rinsed before peeling the cucumber? Return the
                  answer in the format of Yes or No.

       Recipe: Spiced Hot Chocolate
          Step: Heat the contents of the mug for 1 minute and serve.
         VLM: Video-LLaVa

      Prompt: Does the person heat the contents of the mug for 1 minute and served to cook
                  Spiced Hot Chocolate? Have the contents of the mug been mixed before heating
                  for 1 minute and serving?

         VLM: TimeChat
      Prompt: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following

                  question: Does the person heat the contents of the mug for 1 minute and served
                  to cook Spiced Hot Chocolate? Have the contents of the mug been mixed before
                  heating for 1 minute and serving? Return the answer in the format of Yes or No.

                                                          30
    Error Category: Missing Steps
      VLM: Video-LLaVa

  Template: {Did, Is, Does, . . . } the person {perform, execute, doing, . . . } the step recipe step
               from the recipe recipe ?

      VLM: TimeChat
  Template: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following

               question: {Did, Is} the person {perform, doing} the step recipe step ? Return the
               answer in the format of Yes or No.

Question Prompts

       Recipe: Cucumber Raita
          Step: In a mixing bowl, whisk 1 cup of chilled curd until smooth. Use fresh homemade
                  or packaged curd
         VLM: Video-LLaVa

      Prompt: Did the person whisk 1 cup of chilled fresh homemade or packaged curd until
                  smooth while performing the Cucumber Raita recipe?

         VLM: TimeChat
      Prompt: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following

                  question: Did the person whisk 1 cup of chilled fresh homemade or packaged
                  curd until smooth? Return the answer in the format of Yes or No.

       Recipe: Spiced Hot Chocolate
          Step: Add 2 pieces of chocolate to the mug
         VLM: Video-LLaVa

      Prompt: Does the person add 2 pieces of chocolate to the mug while performing Spiced
                  Hot Chocolate recipe?

         VLM: TimeChat
      Prompt: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following

                  question: Does the person add 2 pieces of chocolate to the mug? Return the
                  answer in the format of Yes or No.

                                                          31
    Error Category: Measurement Error
      VLM: Video-LLaVa

  Template: ASSISTANT: To {complete, cook, . . . } the recipe recipe , the person should {pre-
               pare, do, . . . } the step recipe step . {Does, Did, . . . } the person {measure, weigh}
               the {ingredient} accurately?

      VLM: TimeChat
  Template: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following

               question: To {complete, cook, . . . } the recipe recipe , the person should {prepare,
               do, . . . } the step recipe step . {Does, Did, . . . } the person {measure, weigh} the
               {ingredient} accurately? Return the answer in the format of Yes or No.

Question Prompts

       Recipe: Cucumber Raita
          Step: Add 1/4 teaspoon of salt to the bowl.
         VLM: Video-LLaVa

      Prompt: To make the recipe Cucumber Raita, the person should add 1/4 teaspoon of salt to
                  the bowl. Does the person measure 1/4 teaspoon of salt accurately?

         VLM: TimeChat
      Prompt: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following

                  question: To make the recipe Cucumber Raita, the person should add 1/4 teaspoon
                  of salt to the bowl. Does the person measure 1/4 teaspoon of salt accurately?
                  Return the answer in the format of Yes or No.

       Recipe: Spiced Hot Chocolate
          Step: Add 1/5 teaspoon of cinnamon to the mug.
         VLM: Video-LLaVa

      Prompt: To cook the recipe Spiced Hot Chocolate, the person should add 1/5 teaspoon
                  of cinnamon to the mug. Does the person measure 1/5 teaspoon of cinnamon
                  correctly?

         VLM: TimeChat
      Prompt: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following

                  question: To cook the recipe Spiced Hot Chocolate, the person should add 1/5
                  teaspoon of cinnamon to the mug. Does the person measure 1/5 teaspoon of
                  cinnamon correctly? Return the answer in the format of Yes or No.

                                                          32
    Error Category: Temperature Error
      VLM: Video-LLaVa

  Template: ASSISTANT: {While, When . . . } the person is {performing, executing, . . . } the
               step recipe step from the recipe recipe . Is any heating involved? if yes, then did
               the person adhere to the {low, medium, high} {heating, power level} settings of
               {microwave, stove}.

      VLM: TimeChat
  Template: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following

               question: {While, When . . . } the person is {performing, executing, . . . } the step
                recipe step from the recipe recipe . Is any heating involved? if yes, then did
               the person adhere to the {low, medium, high} {heating, power level} settings of
               {microwave, stove}. Return the answer in the format of Yes or No.

Question Prompts

       Recipe: Cucumber Raita
          Step: Peel a cucumber
         VLM: Video-LLaVa

      Prompt: While the person is peeling a cucumber for making Cucumber Raita. Is any
                  heating involved? If yes, did the person adhere to the heating settings?

         VLM: TimeChat
      Prompt: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following

                  question: While the person is peeling a cucumber for making Cucumber Raita. Is
                  any heating involved? If yes, did the person adhere to the heating settings? Return
                  the answer in the format of Yes or No.

       Recipe: Spiced Hot Chocolate
          Step: Heat the contents of the mug for 1 minute and serve.
         VLM: Video-LLaVa

      Prompt: When the person has to heat the contents of the mug for 1 minute and serve for
                  cooking Spiced Hot Chocolate, is any heat required? If yes, did the person adhere
                  to the high heat setting of microwave?

         VLM: TimeChat
      Prompt: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following

                  question: When the person has to heat the contents of the mug for 1 minute and
                  serve for cooking Spiced Hot Chocolate, is any heat required? If yes, did the
                  person adhere to the high heat setting of microwave? Return the answer in the
                  format of Yes or No.

                                                          33
    Error Category: Timing Error
      VLM: Video-LLaVa

  Template: To {cook, make, . . . } recipe , the person {should, has . . . } to recipe step . {Should,
               Does} the person recipe step {perform, make, . . . } for a {specific, certain} time?

      VLM: TimeChat
  Template: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following

               question: To {cook, make, . . . } recipe , the person {should, has . . . } to recipe step .
               {Should, Does} the person recipe step {perform, make, . . . } for a {specific, certain}
               time? Return the answer in the format of Yes or No.

Question Prompts

       Recipe: Butter Corn Cup
          Step: Microwave the corn for 2 minutes.
         VLM: Video-LLaVa

      Prompt: To make Butter Corn Cup, the person should microwave the corn for 2 minutes.
                  Did the person microwave the corn for 2 minutes?

         VLM: TimeChat
      Prompt: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following

                  question: To make Butter Corn Cup, the person should microwave the corn for 2
                  minutes. Did the person microwave the corn for 2 minutes? Return the answer in
                  the format of Yes or No.

       Recipe: Spiced Hot Chocolate
          Step: Heat the contents of the mug for 1 minute and serve.
         VLM: Video-LLaVa

      Prompt: To cook Spiced Hot Chocolate, the person should heat the contents of the mug for
                 1 minute and serve. Does the person heat the contents of the mug for 1 minute
                  before serving?

         VLM: TimeChat
      Prompt: You are given a cooking video. Please watch the video and answer the following

                  question: To cook Spiced Hot Chocolate, the person should heat the contents of
                  the mug for 1 minute and serve. Does the person heat the contents of the mug for
                 1 minute before serving? Return the answer in the format of Yes or No.

                                                          34
B.2 Anomaly Detection

We used anomaly detection methods to classify each frame in each video as either normal or abnormal,
where the latter is defined as an instance that deviates from the expected behaviour (the frame where
participants made errors). Specifically, we used two self-supervised anomaly detection methods
from the literature, self-supervised masked convolutional transformer block (SSMCTB) [56] and
self-supervised predictive convolutional attentive block (SSPCAB) [77], and trained them on top of
ResNet-50 [38], where the latter serves as a neural, image-based feature extractor. Both models were
trained using reconstruction loss [56]. We used normal recordings for training and both normal and
error recordings for testing. We evaluated the benchmark models using the frame-level area under
the curve (AUC) and Equal Error Rate (EER) scores. Table 9 shows the results. We observe that
SSMCTB is slightly better than SSPCAB. The AUC scores displayed in this context demonstrate
only marginal improvement over random chance. This emphasizes the difficulty of the task and
underscores the necessity for specialized approaches to recognize errors in a self-supervised manner.

Table 9: Anomaly Detection

Method       AUC(%) EER (%)

SSMCTB [56]  50.65  49.65
SSPCAB [77]  50.25  49.74

             35
B.3 Supervised Error Recognition

Task. We set up the error recognition task (namely, given a video segment, classify it either as error
or normal) as a supervised binary classification problem. The presence of a variety of errors (that
are both cascading and non-cascading in nature across the duration of the recording) makes solving
this task particularly challenging. We use error annotations and mark a segment as normal if the
corresponding step was performed correctly; else, we mark it as an error.

Features. We obtained features from pre-trained video recognition models, namely (1) Slowfast,
(2) X3D, (3) Omnivore, (4) 3D Resnet, and (5) Imagebind. Since the feature extractors require fixed-
sized inputs (they are neural networks), we divided each video segment into contiguous 1-second
sub-segments. The video segment may not always be perfectly divisible by 1 second as the last
sub-segment might be shorter than 1 second. To make it uniform, we used zero padding; namely, we
added zeros at the end of the sub-segment and extended its duration to 1 second to extract its features.

          TRAINED

          FROZEN                          RGB
                                RGB
           MODALITY
     REPRESENTATIONS

MLP         COMBINED
      REPRESENTATIONS

     FORWARD PASS OF
     REPRESENTATIONS

          MULTI LAYER
         PERCEPTRON

          RGB

           Actor's hand is on                  WEIGHTED
          top of cutting board                 SUMMATION
           beside lettuce leaf
     RGB
             TEXT

                                 DEPTH

                                 AUDIO

                                 Figure 12: SupervisedER architectures of 3 baselines.

Models. We proposed three architectural variants as baselines for Supervised Error Recogni-
tion(Fig. 12). During training, we assigned a segment’s (recipe step) class label to all its 1-second
sub-segments (for which features are extracted). Thus yielding the proposed splits’ train, validation,
and test subsets of data, which are used to learn our proposed variants of the baselines. During
inference, we again divided each video segment into 1-second sub-segments and, after applying any
necessary zero-padding, designated the class of the segment as the majority class of its sub-segments.
Variant-1: Below are the rough steps we followed to train our V1 supervised error recognition models.

                                                          36
       – Dataset: We used two proposed splits, namely, Step (S) and Recordings (R) for training.

       – Model: We trained our models using a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) Head that includes
          one hidden layer. The size of this layer depends on the feature dimensions from the pre-
          trained video recognition models. The hidden layer is followed by a single sigmoid node.

       – Training: We trained these models on the training subset and fine-tuned the hyperparameters
          using the validation subsets of the proposed splits. We maintained a uniform minibatch size
          of 512 instances. We employed ReLU activation functions in the hidden layers and trained
          using the PyTorch [67] on a single NVIDIA A40 GPU. We employed the Adam optimizer
          [50] for training and a learning rate of 0.001. Due to the inherent class imbalance of the
          constructed dataset, we used standard Binary Cross Entropy Loss (BCE Loss) with a weight
          of 1.5 for the positive classes. We trained all our models for 50 epochs.

       – Evaluation: We selected the model that performed best on the validation set, evaluated it
          on the test set, and presented the evaluation results in the main paper.

Variant-2: Below are the rough steps we followed to train our V2 supervised error recognition models.

       – Dataset: We used two proposed splits, namely, Step (S) and Recordings (R) for training.

       – Model: We leveraged the strengths of transformers that facilitate using variable length inputs
          and allow representing time via positional encodings to train baseline error recognition mod-
          els. Specifically, instead of generating predictions for 1-second sub-segments independently,
          we pass the sub-segment features through a transformer encoder to learn representations
          that are contextually aware of the entire video segment of the recipe step. Finally, we pass
          these representations of 1-second sub-segments through a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP)
          head that includes one hidden layer (whose size is determined by the feature dimensions of
          the pre-trained video recognition models) followed by a single sigmoid node.

       – Training: We trained these models on the training subset and fine-tuned the hyperparameters
          using the validation subsets of the proposed splits. We maintained a uniform minibatch size
          of 1 video segment corresponding to a step. We trained using the PyTorch [67] on a single
          NVIDIA A40 GPU. We employed the Adam optimizer [50] for training and a learning rate
          of 1e-5. To address the inherent class imbalance of the dataset, we used standard BCE Loss
          with a weight of 1.5 for the positive classes and trained all our models for 50 epochs.

       – Evaluation: We selected the model that performed best on the validation set, evaluated it
          on the test set, and presented the evaluation results in the main paper.

Variant-3: Below are the rough steps we followed to train our V3 supervised error recognition models.

       – Dataset: We used two proposed splits, namely, Step (S) and Recordings (R) for training.

       – Model: We leveraged the strengths of transformers that facilitate using variable length
          inputs from multiple modalities of data and allow representing time via positional encodings
          to train baseline error recognition models. Specifically, instead of generating predictions for
          a single RGB modality data, we pass the sub-segment features corresponding to RGB, audio,
          text and depth modalities through a transformer encoder to learn unified representations
          that are contextually aware of the entire video segment of the recipe step. Finally, we pass
          these unified representations of multiple modalities that correspond to sub-segments of the
          data through an MLP head that includes one hidden layer (whose size is determined by the
          features of the pre-trained video recognition models) followed by a single sigmoid node.

       – Training: We trained these models on the training subset and fine-tuned the hyperparameters
          using the validation subsets of the proposed splits. We maintained a uniform minibatch size
          of 1 video segment corresponding to a step. We trained using the PyTorch [67] on a single
          NVIDIA A40 GPU. We employed the Adam optimizer [50] for training and a learning rate
          of 5e-5. To address the inherent class imbalance of the dataset, we used standard BCE Loss
          with a weight of 1.5 for the positive classes and trained all our models for 50 epochs.

       – Evaluation: We selected the model that performed best on the validation set, evaluated it
          on the test set, and presented the evaluation results in the main paper.

                                                          37
Table 10: SupervisedER evaluation results of baselines. Variant type (V#), Modality of features (M),
Video (V), Audio (A), Depth (D), and Text (T).

Split Backbone V# Modality Acc P                  R       F1    AUC

   Omnivore V1 V                    71.09 66.07 14.86    24.26  75.7
                    V2 V            69.96 51.56 59.84    55.39  75.7

   Slowfast  V1 V                   33.54 31.88 90.6     47.16  63.06
             V2 V                   68.09 47.69 24.9     32.72  67.18

S  X3D       V1 V                   68.34 48 19.28       27.51  60.19
             V2 V                   67.83 42.86 9.64     15.74  61.5

   3DResnet  V1 V                   63.45 42.9 52.21     47.1   66.16
             V2 V                   61.58 41.47 56.63    47.88  64.5

   ImageBind V3         V           62.78  38.46  32.13  35.01  57.03
                        A           43.86  32.26  72.69  44.69  52.23
                        V, A        63.28  40.76  38.96  39.84  53.87
                        V, A, T     68.79  42.76  41.96  42.36  61.1
                                                         49.84  70.41
                        V, A, D, T  69.4   50.75  48.96
                                                         50.91  63.03
   Omnivore V1 V                    59.76  45.31  58.09  39.04  62.27
                    V2 V            62.3   46.55  33.61
                                                         30.93  56.89
   Slowfast  V1 V                   60.06  40.82  24.9   42.6   59.83
             V2 V                   57.82  41.67  43.57
                                                         44.12  54.66
R X3D        V1 V                   54.69  39.6   49.79  48.75  56.58
             V2 V                   54.25  40.78  60.58
                                                         53.79  62.42
   3DResnet V1          V           41.88  37.65  94.19  50.09  59.22
                    V2  V           57.82  43.56  58.92
                                                         52.55  54.1
   ImageBind V3         V           37.56  36.14  96.27  50.54  54.8
                        A           39.05  35.67  89.72  49.42  55.25
                        V, A        54.25  40.98  62.24  50.13  58.35
                        V, A, T     64.08  44.15  58.01  56.02  65.25

                        V, A, D, T  63.87  49.57  64.4

                                    38
B.4 Supervised Early Error Recognition

VARIANVTID-E1O SEGMENT                  BACKBONE                        MLPNORMAL (0)

                                 RGB

VARVIIDAENO TSE-2GMENT                BACKBONE TRANSFORMER              MLPERROR (1)

                       RGB                                     ENCODER

             Figure 13: Supervised Early Error Recognition architectures of baselines.

Task. We set up the early error recognition task (namely, given only the first half of the video
segment corresponding to a step, classify it either as error or normal) as a supervised binary classifi-
cation problem. Since the model only processes the first half of the video segment, which mainly
showcases the pre-conditions for an action, error recognition in this context involves anticipating
potential errors that may arise from deviations in the pre-conditions of the action. Thus, early error
recognition is an extremely hard setting and the presence of a variety of errors (that are both cascading
and non-cascading in nature across the duration of the recording) makes it more challenging.

Features. We obtained features from pre-trained video recognition models, namely (1) Slowfast,
(2) X3D, (3) Omnivore, (4) 3D Resnet. Since the feature extractors require fixed-sized inputs (they
are neural networks), we divided each video segment into contiguous 1-second sub-segments. The
video segment may not always be perfectly divisible by 1 second as the last sub-segment might be
shorter than 1 second. To make it uniform, we used zero padding; namely, we added zeros at the end
of the sub-segment and extended its duration to 1 second to extract its features.

Models. We proposed two architectural variants as baselines for Supervised Early Error Recogni-
tion(Fig. 13). During training, we assigned a segment’s (recipe step) class label to all its observed
1-second sub-segments (first half of the video segments). Thus yielding the proposed splits’ train,
validation, and test subsets of data, which are used to train our baselines. During inference, we again
divided each partially observed video segment into 1-second sub-segments and assigned the class
label of the partially observed video segment as the majority class of observed sub-segments.

Variant-1: Rough steps we followed to train our V1 supervised early error recognition models.

        – Dataset: We used two proposed splits, namely, Step (S) and Recordings (R) for training.

        – Model: We trained our models using a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) Head that includes
           one hidden layer. The size of this layer depends on the feature dimensions from the pre-
           trained video recognition models. The hidden layer is followed by a single sigmoid node.

        – Training: We trained these models on the training subset and fine-tuned the hyperparameters
           using the validation subsets of the proposed splits. We maintained a uniform minibatch size
           of 512 instances. We employed ReLU activation functions in the hidden layers and trained
           using the PyTorch [67] on a single NVIDIA A40 GPU. We employed the Adam optimizer
           [50] for training and a learning rate of 1e-4. Due to the inherent class imbalance of the
           constructed dataset, we used standard Binary Cross Entropy Loss (BCE Loss) with a weight
           of 1.5 for the positive classes. We trained all our models for 50 epochs.

                                                          39
       – Evaluation: We selected the model that performed best on the validation set, evaluated it
          on the test set, and presented the evaluation results in Table 11.

Variant-2: Rough steps we followed to train our V2 supervised error recognition models.

       – Dataset: We used two proposed splits, namely, Step (S) and Recordings (R) for training.

       – Model: Instead of generating predictions for 1-second sub-segments independently, we pass
          the sub-segment features through a transformer encoder to learn representations that are
          contextually aware of the entire video segment of the recipe step. Finally, we pass these
          representations of 1-second sub-segments through a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) head
          that includes one hidden layer (whose size is determined by the feature dimensions of the
          pre-trained video recognition models) followed by a single sigmoid node.

       – Training: We trained these models on the training subset and fine-tuned the hyperparameters
          using the validation subsets of the proposed splits. We maintained a uniform minibatch size
          of 1 video segment corresponding to a step. We trained using the PyTorch [67] on a single
          NVIDIA A40 GPU. We employed the Adam optimizer [50] for training and a learning rate
          of 1e-5. To address the inherent class imbalance of the dataset, we used standard BCE Loss
          with a weight of 1.5 for the positive classes and trained all our models for 50 epochs.

       – Evaluation: We selected the model that performed best on the validation set, evaluated it
          on the test set, and presented the evaluation results in Table 11.

Table 11: SupervisedEER evaluation results of baselines. Variant type (V#), Modality of features
(M), Video (V), Audio (A), Depth (D), and Text (T).

Split Backbone V# Modality Acc P   R       F1 AUC

   Omnivore V1 V         69.59 75  3.61 6.9 72.9
                   V2 V  69.21 50  1.2 2.34 73.48

   Slowfast  V1 V        67.96 47.15 23.29 31.18 67.23
             V2 V        69.09 50 1.6 3.1 62.72

S  X3D       V1 V        65.96 41.73 23.29 29.9 59.27
             V2 V        68.71 45.45 2.01 3.85 56.5

   3DResnet V1 V         68.46 47.89 13.65 21.25 63.79
                   V2 V  68.84 50 0.4 0.8 60.76

   Omnivore V1 V         64.08 50  2.07 3.98 64.73
                   V2 V  64.08 50  0.41 0.82 65.43

   Slowfast  V1 V        63.79 33.33 0.83  1.62 53.11
             V2 V        63.93 42.86 1.24  2.42 53.38

R X3D        V1 V        63.34 46.27 12.86 20.13 55.24
             V2 V        63.64 28.57 0.83 1.61 56.84

   3DResnet V1 V         63.19 43.75 8.71 14.53 53.47
                   V2 V  63.04 37.04 4.15 7.46 54.73

Remark: We observed that there is a significant drop in performance metrics of all our models
compared to the Supervised Error Recognition task. We also note that our V2 models exhibited lower
performance than our V1 models. We attribute this drop to the extremely noisy signal (due to the
observation of only the pre-conditions of actions) used to recognize errors in the recordings.

                         40
B.5 Multi-Step Localization

Multi-Step localization (MSL) entails both recognizing and localization of steps within a procedural
activity. For this task, we leverage features extracted from pre-trained video recognition models and
train an ActionFormer head to manage the processes of step recognition and localization. In the main
text, we detailed the experimental evaluations of MSL and Robust MSL. Additionally, we trained
models using features extracted with Omnivore as the backbone for video segments of 1-second,
3-second, and 4-second lengths, and we present the results in Table 12. We observed a performance
enhancement in the model as the length of the video segments used for feature extraction increased.

   Table 12: MSL using Omnivore features corresponding to video segments of varying lengths

BD             It = 0.1                    It = 0.3             It = 0.5

           mAP R@1 R@5 mAP R@1 R@5 mAP R@1 R@5

        E 67.51 64.45 62.31 85.32 82.82 78.11 38.32 36.54 33.41
O1s P 75.96 73.35 70.34 92.14 90.51 88.24 45.82 44.12 41.16

        R 73.71 71.45 68.14 92.08 89.82 86.38 42.76 40.52 37.19

        E 72.99 70.05 66.57 86.03 83.68 81.02 43.47 41.83 38.87
O3s P 78.63 76.96 74.61 93.27 91.23 89.18 50.25 48.54 44.85

        R 76.82 74.90 71.94 91.33 89.61 88.11 49.23 47.84 44.76

        E 71.85 69.79 64.93 88.12 86.33 83.15 43.13 41.54 38.95
O4s P 79.33 77.39 74.24 93.46 91.67 89.95 50.69 49.49 46.19

        R 78.61 76.59 73.81 93.04 90.99 88.80 50.24 48.62 45.64

                             Table 13: MSL evaluation results.

B          D                 It = 0.1      It = 0.3             It = 0.5

              mAP R@1 R@5 mAP R@1 R@5 mAP R@1 R@5

3D Resnet  E 25.98 54.82 77.59 23.75 48.38 72.19 19.59 38.44 61.87
           P 29.29 63.07 88.96 27.71 56.60 84.75 23.21 46.79 76.86
           R 29.39 61.14 85.41 27.89 55.82 82.17 23.97 46.54 73.29

Slowfast   E 27.68 55.73 77.45 25.51 48.98 70.90 21.09 37.82 60.58
           P 32.77 63.22 90.43 31.21 58.82 86.82 27.25 50.70 79.49
           R 32.90 63.97 89.29 31.47 59.26 85.32 27.89 51.62 77.27

                  E 28.12 51.76 73.00 26.38 46.16 67.87 21.35 37.12 57.81
VideoMAE P 38.86 64.86 84.05 37.41 60.32 80.63 32.24 51.46 71.88

                  R 37.44 63.08 80.90 35.11 57.30 77.38 30.76 49.19 69.43

Omnivore   E 40.40 67.51 87.69 38.32 62.31 82.82 33.41 53.01 72.85
           P 48.16 75.96 93.41 45.82 70.34 90.51 41.16 62.00 84.73
           R 44.81 73.71 93.34 42.76 68.14 89.82 37.19 56.93 81.86

               Table 14: RobustMSL evaluation results.

   B       DT                It = 0.1      It = 0.3             It = 0.5

               mAP R@1 R@5 mAP R@1 R@5 mAP R@1 R@5

           E Tn 24.44 38.22 52.48 22.97 34.77 49.51 18.67 28.57 42.68
                 Te 7.53 13.54 20.52 6.93 11.4 18.36 5.63 8.55 15.13

VideoMAE P Tn 26.78 37.43 46.28 25.68 34.79 44.6 22.02 29.43 39.81
                        Te 16.98 27.43 37.76 16.46 25.53 36.03 14.64 22.03 32.07

           R Tn 26.27 37.15 46.93 24.71 34.06 45.03 21.51 29.36 40.44
                 Te 15.43 25.94 33.97 14.44 23.23 32.35 12.96 19.83 28.99

           E Tn 34.65 47.91 60.63 33.06 44.77 58.36 28.59 38.38 51.9
                 Te 12.51 19.6 27.06 11.66 17.54 24.45 9.94 14.63 20.96

Omnivore P Tn 32.5 44.45 52.47 31.13 41.53 50.91 28.39 37.03 47.97
                       Te 21.28 31.51 40.93 20.12 28.81 39.6 18.08 24.96 36.77

           R Tn 30.22 42.43 52.11 28.94 39.47 50.49 25.15 32.65 46.51
                 Te 19.54 31.28 41.24 18.4 28.66 39.33 16.27 24.28 35.35

Extended Analysis. In Tables 13 & 14, we note that when data is split by environments, with
the test set comprising new environments, the models, struggle to recognize the steps performed
in the videos. As we increase thresholded Intersection Over Union (It), we observe a drop in the
performance of the models, thus signifying the low confidence in the prediction of the current steps.

                                       41
B.6 Procedure Learning

Given long, untrimmed videos of procedural activities where the sequences of steps can be performed
in multiple orders, self-supervised procedure learning entails the identification of relevant frames
across videos of activity and the estimation of sequential steps required to complete the activity.
Thus, the task entails the identification of key steps and their sequence to complete an activity.
To benchmark procedure learning, we used normal recordings from our dataset and assessed the
performance of recently proposed methods [3, 16]. In the main text, we presented results when
evaluated on only 5 recipes. Here, in Table 15, we present the evaluation results on all 24 recipes.
The results in Table 15 showcase the performance of models trained using methods M1 [16] and
M2 [3]. Where M1 employs Cycleback Regression Loss (C) and M1 employs a combination of
both Cycleback Regression Loss (C) and Contrastive - Inverse Difference Moment Loss (C ). It is
important to note that we only train embedder networks using these loss functions and maintain the
Pro-Cut Module (PCM) for assigning frames to key steps. In Table 15, P represents precision, R
represents recall, and I represents IOU.

Table 15: Self-Supervised Procedure Learning evaluation results on the selected 24 recipes.

Recipe                     Random         M1        M2

                        P  RI          P  R   I  P  R   I

BlenderBananaPancakes   7.40 3.83 2.26 12.65 9.50 5.16 15.54 9.96 5.72

BreakfastBurritos       9.66 4.04 2.59 18.72 11.46 6.77 16.58 10.77 5.87

BroccoliStirFry         4.21 3.81 1.73 9.92 9.11 3.93 8.20 8.10 3.85

ButterCornCup           8.37 3.91 2.16 13.82 11.85 5.79 15.07 12.30 5.82

CapreseBruschetta       9.34 3.96 2.52 25.55 12.89 7.52 20.53 9.09 5.59

CheesePimiento          9.10 3.87 2.41 19.74 10.48 6.44 17.49 10.32 6.26

Coffee                  6.54 3.87 2.17 13.68 9.91 5.49 15.76 10.25 5.63

CucumberRaita           8.90 3.64 2.44 13.58 7.92 5.14 16.15 9.97 6.09

DressedUpMeatballs      7.28 3.80 2.26 15.20 10.80 6.05 17.59 10.27 5.81

HerbOmeletWithFriedTomatoes 6.82 4.05 1.98 14.66 14.98 5.50 14.64 11.34 6.29

MicrowaveEggSandwich    8.81 3.98 2.61 16.25 10.44 6.16 19.16 11.29 6.99

MicrowaveFrenchToast    9.03 3.74 2.49 16.82 7.90 5.07 17.31 8.82 5.66

MicrowaveMugPizza       7.53 3.90 2.38 12.82 9.78 5.27 12.69 9.18 5.18

MugCake                 5.45 4.00 2.12 16.12 12.95 6.87 10.32 8.85 4.40

PanFriedTofu            5.35 3.97 1.54 8.86 10.39 3.75 9.34 12.44 3.87

Pinwheels               6.54 4.28 2.13 13.58 11.96 5.92 16.08 13.06 7.05

Ramen                   6.85 4.12 1.87 11.09 9.97 4.48 12.90 10.92 5.07

SautedMushrooms         6.08 3.81 2.02 15.06 12.22 6.16 19.54 13.83 7.42

ScrambledEggs           4.74 3.95 1.89 11.11 11.08 5.27 11.70 10.96 5.27

SpicedHotChocolate      14.08 3.82 3.09 29.82 10.58 8.49 29.79 11.04 8.74

SpicyTunaAvocadoWraps   6.25 3.90 2.21 15.62 10.52 5.67 12.47 9.61 5.25

TomatoChutney           5.45 3.89 1.85 12.25 10.68 5.42 12.25 10.68 5.42

TomatoMozzarellaSalad   10.88 3.91 2.38 19.77 10.21 6.01 19.20 10.48 5.96

Zoodles                 7.91 4.08 2.22 18.32 12.80 6.37 18.32 12.80 6.37

Average                 7.61 3.92 2.22 15.62 10.85 5.78 15.78 10.68 5.82

                                   42
C Data

C.1 Data Collection Planning

Our objective is to capture data that aids in detecting, segmenting, and analyzing errors that occur
during the execution of long procedural tasks. To accomplish this, we need to address the following:

       1. What to record: Specifically, select the domain and tasks (such as recipes).
       2. How to record: Choice of appropriate sensors and development of data capturing system.
       3. Whom to record: This entails participant selection and training.

C.1.1 What to record?

Current procedural activity datasets encompass recorded and curated ones from crowd-sourced online
platforms. Amongst the recorded datasets, Breakfast [51], 50Salads [87], CMU-MMAC [13], and
GTEA [21] capture people performing cooking activities, and Assembly-101 [19], EPIC-TENTS
[44] and MECCANO [75] capture people performing activities related to assembly of toys, tents and
lego blocks, respectively. Curated datasets like COIN [89], CrossTask [105], and HowTo100M [60]
encompass a wide variety of activities from different domains. We introduced a new perspective on
understanding procedural activities from the lens of errors made while performing procedural tasks.
We embark on an investigation into this new idea by choosing cooking as the domain of interest. This
careful choice stems from the fact that cooking activities often encompass complex procedures and
provide an opportunity to capture a plethora of potential, predominantly benign errors.

Table 16: Selected recipes categorized based on the type of required heating instrument.

Heating Instrument  Recipe                  Heating Instrument  Recipe
Kettle                                      Nothing
Microwave           Coffee                                      Pinwheels
                    Breakfast Burritos      Pan                 Spicy Tuna Avocado Wraps
Nothing             Butter Corn Cup                             Tomato Mozzarella Salad
                    Cheese Pimiento                             Blender Banana Pancakes
                    Dressed Up Meatballs                        Broccoli Stir Fry
                    Microwave Egg Sandwich                      Caprese Bruschetta
                    Microwave French Toast                      Herb Omelet with Fried Tomatoes
                    Microwave Mug Pizza                         Pan Fried Tofu
                    Mug Cake                                    Sauteed Mushrooms
                    Ramen                                       Scrambled Eggs
                    Spiced Hot Chocolate                        Tomato Chutney
                    Cucumber Raita                              Zoodles

Recipes & Task Graphs We have carefully selected 24 diverse recipes from WikiHow (Table 16)
that represent various cuisines and require different culinary tools during preparation. Each recipe in
our selected set can be subdivided into several atomic steps, where each step involves performing
a specific sub-task in the recipe. In general, most recipes available on the web list these sub-tasks
in a specific order. However, common sense tells us that each recipe can often be described by a
partial order over the sub-tasks rather than a total order. More formally, we use a task graph to
represent the partial order over the steps. Each node in the task graph corresponds to a step, and a
directed edge between node i and node j denotes that step i must be done before step j (namely i is
a pre-condition of j). For our selected recipes, the corresponding task graphs are directed acyclic
graphs, and therefore a topological sort over them is a valid execution of the recipe. Our task graphs
also include two dummy nodes, “START” and “END”, which denote the start and end of recipes,
respectively and ensure that our task graphs always have one start node and one terminal node.

To simplify the complexity of a recipe, we have adopted a technique that uses a flow graph structure
[96] to represent the dependencies between steps (think of it like a flowchart but designed for recipes).
This approach helps us establish a precise connection between actions and their consequences. Using
an action-centric graph, we emphasize the steps involved in the procedure and illustrate the sequence
of operations in an easy-to-understand manner. Each action influences the subsequent ones, effectively
demonstrating the interdependencies between tasks. Figure 15 presents an example of a task graph.

We illustrate the process we used to convert a recipe to a task graph using the recipe Blender Banana
Pancakes (see figures 14 and 15 for a visual guide). Given the recipe description, we first identify all

                                            43
  Add 1 banana, 1 egg, 1 heaped tbsp flour and 1/2 tsp         TASK
baking powder to a blender and blitz for 20 seconds. Melt     GRAPH

    a small knob of butter in a non-stick frying pan over
 low-medium heat. Pour three little puddles straight from
the blender into the frying pan. Cook for 1 min or until the
  tops start to bubble. Flip with a fork or a fish slice and
cook for 20-30 seconds more. Transfer to a plate. Chop

      1 strawberry. Serve the pancakes with chopped
   strawberries and a splash of maple syrup if you like.

                     IDENTIFY
                     ACTIONS

                      SELECT                                                     DEVELOP
                      RECIPE                                                        STEPS

  Add 1 banana, 1 egg, 1 heaped tbsp flour and 1/2 tsp        - Add - Add 1 banana to a blender,
baking powder to a blender and blitz for 20 seconds. Melt     - Add - Add 1 egg to the blender,
                                                              - Add - Add 1 heaped tbsp flour to the blender
    a small knob of butter in a non-stick frying pan over     - Add - Add 1/2 tsp baking powder to the blender
 low-medium heat. Pour three little puddles straight from     - Blitz - Blitz blender for 20 seconds.
the blender into the frying pan. Cook for 1 min or until the  - Melt - Melt a small knob of butter in a non-stick frying
  tops start to bubble. Flip with a fork or a fish slice and
cook for 20-30 seconds more. Transfer to a plate. Chop 1        pan over low-medium heat.
                                                              - Pour - Pour three little puddles straight from the
       strawberry. Serve the pancakes with chopped
   strawberries and a splash of maple syrup if you like.        blender into the frying pan.
                                                              - Cook - Cook for 1 min or until the tops start to bubble.
                                                              - Flip - Flip with a fork or a fish slice
                                                              - Cook - Cook for 20-30 seconds more.
                                                              - Transfer - Transfer to a plate.
                                                              - Chop - Chop 1 strawberry.
                                                              - Serve - Serve the pancakes with chopped strawberries
                                                              - Splash - Splash of maple syrup if you like.

Figure 14: TaskGraphGeneration. This figure demonstrates the four-step process used to create an
action-centric graph for a recipe, using an example. Given the recipe text as shown in select recipe,
we identify and mark all the actions necessary for the execution of the recipe as shown in identify
actions. Once these actions are identified, we develop them into steps (as shown in develop steps)
ensuring each step encompasses only one of the previously identified actions. These steps are used to
construct an action-centric graph for the recipe resulting in a structure as depicted in Figure 15

the actions necessary to complete the recipe and develop steps based on the identified actions, where
each step contains only one among the identified actions, as shown in figure 14. After we develop
steps, we use a relationship annotation tool19 to represent the implicit order constraints amongst the
developed steps. The creation of action-centric graphs serves multiple purposes. These graphs can be
utilized to prepare recipe scripts with various orders while still strictly adhering to the constraints
present in the graph. Moreover, given a recording, the graph can be used to verify if the individual
followed the correct sequence of actions based on the inherent graph structure.ipe Blender Banana
Pancakes, the developed steps from 14, when represented as an action-centric graph, result in Fig. 15.

In the future, we envision using our dataset to construct more fine-grained task graphs where
the meaning of the steps is taken into account and how the step changes the environment (post-
condition for a step). In literature, different methods have been proposed to illustrate procedural
activities using task graphs and their variations, such as FlowGraphs [96], Recipe Programs [66],
ConjugateTaskGraphs [36], and ActionDynamicTaskGraphs [59] and our dataset can be used to learn
these task graphs in an unsupervised manner (or one can use the semantics of these various task
graphs to label the videos and solve the problem in a supervised manner).

19https://www.lighttag.io/
                                                       44
                                     START

Chop-Chop 1  Add-Add 1/2 tsp baking  Add-Add 1 banana to  Add-Add 1 egg to a  Add-Add 1 heaped tbsp
 Strawberry    powder to a blender           a blender            blender         flour to a blender

                 Melt-Melt a small knob of butter in a    Blitz-Blitz the blender
             non-stick frying pan over low-medium heat        for 20 seconds

               Cook-Cook for 1min or until the tops           Pour-Pour three little puddles straight
                              start to bubble                   from the blender into the frying pan

               Cook-Cook for 20-30 seconds more               Flip-Flip the pancakes with a fork or a
                                                                            fish slice spatula

                                                                     Transfer-Transfer to a plate

Serve-Serve the pancakes with chopped strawberries                                                       END
                                                                     Splash-Splash maple syrup on plate

Figure 15: This graph displays the implicit dependency structure of the recipe Blender Banana
Pancakes where the content of each node can be interpreted as {{action}-{step}} where {action}
presents the description of the necessary action to be performed, and {step} presents the description
as presented in the recipe text that encompasses the action, ingredients and their quantity required for
the execution of the action, necessary tools used in the execution of the action, constraints on the
duration of the action, how it is performed, why it is performed and other necessary settings of the
environment. e.g., {Add} - {Add one banana to a blender}; here add is the necessary action and the
step: Add one banana to a blender describes the action (adding), ingredient (banana), quantity (1)

C.1.2 How to record?

Sensors. Recognizing the limitations of the Hololens2 augmented reality device in capturing data,
despite its advanced technology, we decided to employ a dual-device strategy 20. While the Hololens2
offers a wealth of data from various sensors, we faced two main challenges. First, the limited
field of view of the RGB camera inhibits comprehensive data capture. Second, utilizing all the
secondary sensors of the Hololens2 requires operating in research mode, which, unfortunately, leads
to a significant frame rate reduction for other sensory data, such as depth and monochrome cameras,
when we increase the quality of the captured RGB frames.

To address these issues, we integrated a GoPro into our data-capturing system. Positioned above the
Hololens2 on a head mount worn by the participant, the GoPro records 4K videos at 30 frames per
second, offering a wider field of view compared to that of the Hololens2’s RGB frames. This setup
provides us with a more detailed perspective on the participant’s activities. We use the Hololens2
in research mode to obtain a diverse range of data, including depth streams and spatial information
such as head and hand movements. Additionally, we collect data from three Inertial Measurement
Unit (IMU) sensors: an accelerometer, a gyroscope, and a magnetometer. This combined approach
enables us to capture complete, high-quality activity data.

Data Capturing System. We have designed a versatile and expandable system for recording
procedural activities, which can be readily adapted to meet various needs. This system has two

   20Although we use a dual-device strategy to record activities, it’s important to note that these devices
aren’t synchronized prior to the start of the recording process. Instead, captured footage from both devices is
programmatically synchronized during post-processing using the associated timestamps

                                                          45
distinct use cases: (1) as a standalone user application specifically designed for procedural activities
and (2) as a comprehensive, plug-and-play system that functions beyond being just a user application.
In its first mode, the application serves a dual role: primarily as a display interface 21 for the procedure
of the activity and secondarily as a tool for noting and updating any errors made during the execution
of the activity. In its second mode, the system is equipped to capture data streams from various
sensors and allows for easy connection and configuration. This dual functionality enhances the
system’s adaptability, making it an efficient tool for a wide range of procedural activities.

(1) User Application. Using several illustrative snippets, we will briefly explain how our system
can be used as a user interface to capture complex procedural activities, including errors. This process
within our system is divided into four stages to facilitate data collection from participants:
Stage-1. First stage (Figure 16) presents the participant with a list of activities to the left. Upon
selection, corresponding steps for the selected activity are then displayed on the right side of the page.

Figure 16: Stage-1. The participant selects the activity they wish to perform from the options
presented on the left. Once a selection is made, the necessary steps for the chosen recipe will be
displayed.
We provide two methods for presenting the steps of an activity, based on the input received when
information about the activities is uploaded to the database:

        – Recipe Text: If the activity’s input is in plain text format, we display the text as provided.
        – Task Graph: If the input is an action-centric task graph, we present a valid sequence of

           steps that conforms to the constraints defined by the graph.
Stage-2. Activity Preparation Stage. Although optional for a normal recording, its primary function
is to prepare a script to execute during an error recording. One of our approaches to capturing error
recordings involves providing participants with an interface to contemplate the errors they intend to
make and modify the description of the steps for a particular activity recording session. As illustrated
in Figure 17, participants can update each step based on different types of errors categorized as
described above. When the participant records, they will see the updated step description as part
of the sequence of steps. Moreover, GPT-4 has provided suggestions on potential errors that may
occur during the activity, now available as static hint options for this recipe. However, we have
observed that these generic errors provided by GPT-4 are not particularly helpful, as participants
only considered them for script preparation in 20% of cases.
Stage-3. We present the participants with the sequence of steps (topological order of the task graph)
for the selected activity that they will perform as illustrated in Figure 18.

   21Please view the tablet that displays the interface, as shown in video snippets posted on our website

                                                          46
Figure 17: Stage-2. Interface enables participants to update step descriptions and prepare error
scripts.

                Figure 18: Stage-3. Displays the necessary steps to complete an activity.
Stage-4. After the data is captured either using our system or from a standalone recording system,
we provide an interface to participants to review the recording they performed and correspondingly
update any unplanned errors they make while performing the activity. In one of our strategies for
capturing error recordings, we asked participants to induce errors impromptu while performing the
activity. Here participants are given a series of steps corresponding to the task graph’s topological
order. Subsequently, participants updated information about errors they made while performing the
recipe. Figure 19 presents a snippet where the participant updates one of the errors made while
performing the recipe Caprese Bruschetta
(2) Data Capturing Application. The standalone application discussed earlier can be converted
into a data-capturing application by integrating several plug-and-play modules. We constructed both
user and data capturing applications using the software components illustrated in Figure 20.

                                                          47
Figure 19: Stage-4. Similar to Stage 2, the interface allows participants to update the errors induced.

FRONTEND  BACKEND             MESSAGE        DATABASE
                                QUEUE

REACT JS  PYTHON                 REDIS       FIREBASE

Figure 20: Software Components used to build the proposed system

                  HOLOLENS2      BACKEND     MESSAGE
                                              QUEUE

                                          1

                                                             REDIS

          1 CAPTAINCOOK 1 HOLOLENS           DATABASE

          APPLICATION            SERVICE  1

                       GOPRO                           FIREBASE

          2                                  1, 2

                              2  STORAGE               DATABASE

                                 SERVICE     1, 2

                                                                                                                                                              NAS

                                   Figure 21: Architecture for data capturing system
In developing our data-capturing application, we have utilized data streams from various devices,
specifically Hololens2 and a GoPro. The Hololens2 is particularly suited for our needs when set in
research mode. It offers a wealth of data from an array of sensors, including a depth sensor, three
Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) sensors - an accelerometer, a gyroscope, and a magnetometer - and
spatial information that contains head and hand tracking data. For the Hololens2, we created a custom
Unity streamer application, taking inspiration from [14]. This application acts as a server, while

                                                          48
our Python backend application assumes the role of a client. When we initiate a recording session,
we establish one TCP socket connection for each sensor to capture data. As the sensor-specific
data stream is received, it is immediately pushed onto the sensor-specific Redis message queue 22
Another dedicated Python backend service polls data from these message queues, processes it and
subsequently stores it on a locally configured Network Attached Storage (NAS) server. When starting
a recording session with GoPro, we utilize the OpenGoPro library to communicate and capture data
at the established 4K resolution and 30 FPS. The recorded video is then downloaded from the GoPro
through WiFi and saved onto the local NAS server. This architecture, as illustrated in Figure 21,
enables us to capture, process, and securely store vast amounts of data in real-time.

C.1.3 Whom to record

Participant Statistics. The statistics concerning the participants who engaged in cooking activities
are presented in Figure 22. It is important to highlight that participation in the recording process was
entirely voluntary, and participants received no compensation.

Female - 25%             Left - 25%                                               Novice - 25%
             Male - 75%               Right - 75%          Skilled - 37.5%

                                                                       Intermediate- 37.5%

(a) Male-Female Ratio    (b) Dominant Hand Ratio           (c) Cooking Expertise

Figure 22: Participant Statistics. Displays information about the participants.

Participant Training. To guarantee precise data collection on cooking errors, it is essential that
participants have fundamental culinary skills and thorough knowledge of the recipes they will be
preparing. To assist participants, we provided them with a comprehensive list of instructional videos
on basic culinary skills and techniques specific to different recipes.

Sources of bias. We recognize the inherent biases of this dataset, notably the smaller number of
participants compared to traditional, large-scale datasets used for action or activity understanding. It
is important to note that each participant was required to perform and record the same recipe four
times. With each iteration, the recording script was altered, ensuring that each recording remained
distinct. Additionally, while many errors were intentionally induced by following a script, participants
also made numerous unintentional errors, which they later annotated.

22https://redis.com/
                                                       49
C.2 Data Collection

After determining what, where, and whom to record, we began collecting data from participants
engaged in cooking activities. Over a period of 32 days, we conducted recordings in 10 different
kitchen settings across the United States. Participants were able to schedule their availability for these
activities in various kitchen environments. We provide statistics for each selected recipe, detailing the
number of normal and error recordings and their respective durations in Table 17 and Figure 23.

Table 17: Statistics. Nn–Count of normal recordings taken for the recipe, Dn–Total duration of these normal
recordings, Ne–Count of error recordings taken for the recipe, De–Total duration of these error recordings.

Recipe                                                                               Steps                             Nn                                 Dn (hrs) Ne                                                  De (hrs)

Pinwheels                                                                            19                                4                                  0.72                         8                               1.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.64
Tomato Mozzarella Salad                                                              9                                 11                                 1.31                         7                               1.49
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.01
Butter Corn Cup                                                                      12                                6                                  1.62                         8                               3.13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.36
Tomato Chutney                                                                       19                                7                                  3.34                         8                               2.19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.67
Scrambled Eggs                                                                       23                                6                                  2.69                         10                              2.21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.57
Cucumber Raita                                                                       11                                12                                 2.9                          8                               2.14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.68
Zoodles                                                                              13                                5                                  1.35                         10                              2.31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.32
Microwave Egg Sandwich                                                               12                                6                                  1.05                         12                              1.72
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.66
Sauted Mushrooms                                                                     18                                6                                  2.73                         8                               2.73
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3.09
Blender Banana Pancakes                                                              14                                7                                  1.78                         12                              1.14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.45
Herb Omelet with Fried Tomatoes 15                                                                                     6                                  1.73                         11                              1.58
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.52
Broccoli Stir Fry                                                                    25                                11                                 5.74                         5                               1.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.66
Pan Fried Tofu                                                                       19                                8                                  3.38                         7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       44.41
Mug Cake                                                                             20                                7                                  2.44                         10

Cheese Pimiento                                                                      11                                6                                  1.47                         9

Spicy Tuna Avocado Wraps                                                             17                                7                                  2.0                          11

Caprese Bruschetta                                                                   11                                6                                  1.92                         12

Dressed Up Meatballs                                                                 16                                6                                  2.0                          10

Microwave Mug Pizza                                                                  14                                7                                  1.47                         6

Ramen                                                                                15                                10                                 2.40                         7

Coffee                                                                               16                                8                                  1.97                         7

Breakfast Burritos                                                                   11                                6                                  1.22                         10

Spiced Hot Chocolate                                                                 7                                 6                                  0.82                         10

Microwave French Toast                                                               11                                9                                  1.94                         5

Total                                                                                384                               173                                50.05                        211

                                                                                        # Normal Recordings                  # Error Recordings

20

# Recordings15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Recording Duraiton(Hr)
10

5

0

   heels     Salad      Cup   hutney     Eggs      Raita    odles     wich       ms   ncakes     atoes   Stir Fry      Tofu     Cake    iento       raps    hetta   atballs     Pizza      en   offee   urritos      colate     Toast
inw       lla       orn      C        led      ber        Zo       and      shroo    a        om        li         ried      ug       im         o W      sc       e         ug        Ram     C       B            o        ch
                                                                 Egg S d Mu ana P ried T occo Pan F                          e M se o P ca e U d Bru p M ve M                                  kfas o t t C F h ren
z P za t r t e e m r C at r o am c b umSc                                                                                    C n h a ap ss cr e Av res ed owa                                  Brea d H ice owave
    Mo    Bu        To                Cu                  wav S e au r te Ba it n h F Br
to
oma ic l r e o nd l e et w                                                                                                            cy Tu C Dre Mi                                                   Sp         icr
T M B me                                                                                                                     Spi                                                                                 M

                                                                            Herb O

          Figure 23: Statistics. Count and duration (in hours) statistics of normal and error recordings.

Inspection & Acclimatisation. Before initiating the recording process in each environment, partic-
ipants followed a series of preparatory steps. Initially, they were instructed to remove any identifiable
information from body parts visible during the recording. Additionally, they were checked to ensure
they were not carrying personal identification devices, such as smartwatches containing personal
data. As participants were operating in unfamiliar kitchen settings, they received a comprehensive
orientation on the locations of all essential ingredients needed to complete the recipe.

                                                                                                                   50
Normal Recordings. Participants were provided with a tablet to access the user application de-
scribed earlier. Initially, they were instructed to perform normal activities. Upon choosing a normal
activity, each participant was presented with a sequence of steps that followed the topological order
of the action-centric task graph constructed for that activity. Participants were expected to adhere
strictly to the sequence displayed on the tablet and avoid any deviations that could lead to errors.
However, participants committed numerous unintentional errors during their first execution of any
given recipe and later annotated the errors induced accordingly.
Error Recordings. We developed three strategies23 for participants to choose from, each tailored
to perform the recipe in a specific environment. After choosing the strategy, participants were
given detailed instructions on how to perform the recipes. We list the strategies presented to the
participants (1) Impromptu: Participants were asked to induce errors while performing the recipe.
Following the completion of each recording, participants used a web-based interface to update the
errors they performed during each step. Due to the complex nature of cooking activities and the lack
of experience of the participants in cooking, many errors induced in this strategy were unintentional.
(2) Disordered Steps: Participants were given pre-prepared error scripts with missing steps and
ordering errors. (3) Induct Error: Participants used a web-based interface to create an error script
for each selected recipe recording. The modified recipe steps were displayed on a tablet, enabling
participants to perform according to their scripted errors.
Caveats. We rely on a tablet-based interface to display the sequence of steps and also capture
recordings in 4K resolution. Thus, we are aware that an OCR-based system can recognize the active
step information in the tablet. To address this, we made sure that the test set included videos in which
participants viewed the entire recipe instruction text as a paragraph instead of a sequence of steps.

   23The practice of using scripted videos for activity understanding [82] has inspired us to develop the strategies.
                                                          51
C.3 Data Processing

C.3.1 Synchronization

After recording sessions in a kitchen environment, the data is transferred to a local NAS system and a
synchronization service is run to align the raw data streams captured by the Hololens2. This includes
synchronizing data from multiple streams—RGB, depth, spatial, and three Inertial Measurement Unit
(IMU) sensors—using timestamps provided by the Hololens2. Post synchronization, both the raw
and synchronized data are uploaded to cloud storage, and the links are made public.

C.3.2 Annotation

Coarse-Grained Action/Step Annotations. We developed an interface for performing step anno-
tations in Label Studio24. This interface is used by each annotator to mark the start and end times
of each step. Our steps are significantly longer than individual fine-grained actions and encompass
multiple fine-grained actions required to perform the described step. Table 18 presents a summary and
comparison of coarse-grained action/step annotations for our dataset alongside other popular datasets.
To facilitate these annotations, we used both our user application and Label Studio. We integrated our
application with Label Studio through its provided APIs, enabling the seamless creation of a labelling
environment for each recording and ensuring that annotations are reliably stored.

Table 18: Comparison of coarse-grained action or step annotations across related datasets. Here, Tavg represents
the avg. duration for each video, N seg shows the total number of segments, Navg seg reveals the avg. number of
segments per video, and Tavg seg shows the avg. duration for all segments.

                  Dataset       Tavg (min) N seg Navg seg Tavg seg (sec)

                  50Salads      6.4   899  18     36.8

                  Breakfast     2.3   11,300 6.6  15.1

                  Assembly 101  7.1   9523 24     16.5

                  CSV           0.2   18488 9.53  2.1

                  HoloAssist    4.48  15927 7.17  39.3

                  Ours (Total)  14.8  5300 13.8   52.78

      Figure 24: Annotation Interface developed to generate step annotations for a recording

Annotation Interface. We will briefly explain the rationale behind the design choices for our
annotation interface. First, in step annotations, our goal is to define the temporal boundaries for each
step of the recording. Consequently, we have positioned a complete list of all the steps associated with

   24https://labelstud.io/

                                                          52
the activity beneath the video. When a time period is identified as the boundary for a specific activity
step, it appears on the left-hand side of the screen. Simultaneously, the start and end times of the step
are displayed on the right side in the corresponding time slots, allowing for minor adjustments.
Fine-Grained Action Annotations. Drawing inspiration from the pause-and-talk narrator [11], we
have developed a web-based tool for fine-grained action annotation that leverages OpenAI’s Whisper
APIs for speech-to-text translation. While this system is built around the Whisper API, it is designed
to be flexible enough to integrate any automatic speech recognition (ASR) system capable of handling
transcription requests. Upon its acceptance, we will release this web-based annotation tool. Figure 25
illustrates the key steps for a recording and their corresponding step and action annotations.

            Figure 25: Step and action annotations. for the recipe Spiced Hot Chocolate.
Error annotations. Participants are required to document the errors (Appendix C.2) made during
each recording. We compile the error descriptions and categorizations provided by the participants
and succinctly display them, as shown in Figure 3 (see Error Categories) in the main paper. In
Figure 26, we present the frequency of each error category type induced during execution.

           Figure 26: Frequency of errors. induced in the recordings for each recipe type.
C.3.3 Data Composition
In this section, we list down all the components provided as part of our data. Raw and synchronized
multi-modal data from Hololens2: The dataset includes raw data captured using the Hololens2
device. This data is multi-modal, which means it contains information in several different forms,

                                                          53
including visual (e.g., images or videos), auditory (e.g., sounds or speech), and others (like depth
information, accelerometer readings, etc.). 4K videos from GoPro: Includes high-resolution
4K videos recorded using a GoPro camera. Such high-resolution video can provide much detail,
particularly useful for tasks like object recognition. Step annotations for all the data. Fine-grained
actions for 20% of the data: Fine-grained actions might include specifics about what objects are
being manipulated, exactly what movements are being made, and so on. This data could be helpful
for tasks that involve understanding or predicting specific types of actions. Extracted features using
multiple backbones for different tasks:. We provide a comprehensive overview of the components
we release with the dataset in table 19

Table 19: This table presents an overview of the components we release as part of the dataset.

                                       RGB                RGB

                                       RGB pose           RGB pose

                                       Depth              Depth

                                       Depth pose         Depth pose

                                       Audio              Audio

Hololens2 Raw                          Head pose          Synchronized Head pose

                                       Left wrist pose    Left wrist pose

                                       Right wrist pose   Right wrist pose

                                       IMU Accelerometer  IMU Accelerometer

                                       IMU Gyroscope      IMU Gyroscope

                                       IMU Magnetometer   IMU Magnetometer

Gopro  Raw                             RGB
                                       Audio

Annotations Step
                  Fine-grained Action

C.3.4 Maintenance

The dataset will be hosted on Box data storage drives and accessible via a publicly available link.
The associated website will provide information about the code, dataset, and other details.

C.3.5 License

Copyright [2023] [The University of Texas at Dallas]
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in
compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at
http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is
distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND,
either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.

                                              54
