Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

PROCEDURAL MISTAKE DETECTION VIA
ACTION EFFECT MODELING

 Wenliang Guo, Yujiang Pu, Yu Kong
 Michigan State University, USA
 {guowenli,puyujian,yukong}@msu.edu

                                           ABSTRACT

          Mistake detection in procedural tasks is essential for building intelligent systems
          that support learning and task execution. Existing approaches primarily analyze
          how an action is performed, while overlooking what it produces, i.e., the action
          effect. Yet many errors manifest not in the execution itself but in the resulting
          outcome, such as an unintended object state or incorrect spatial arrangement. To
          address this gap, we propose Action Effect Modeling (AEM), a unified framework
          that jointly captures action execution and its outcomes through a probabilistic for-
          mulation. AEM first identifies the outcome of an action by selecting the most
          informative effect frame based on semantic relevance and visual quality. It then
          extracts complementary cues from visual grounding and symbolic scene graphs,
          aligning them in a shared latent space to form robust effect-aware representations.
          To detect mistakes, we further design a prompt-based detector that incorporates
          task-specific prompts and aligns each action segment with its intended execution
          semantics. Our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on the EgoPER
          and CaptainCook4D benchmarks under the challenging one-class classification
          (OCC) setting. These results demonstrate that modeling both execution and out-
          come yields more reliable mistake detection, and highlight the potential of effect-
          aware representations to benefit a broader range of downstream applications. 1

1 INTRODUCTION

Mistakes are inevitable in procedural tasks, from cooking and assembly to medical procedures.
While humans refine their skills through learning and experience, they often overlook subtle execu-
tion details that lead to unintended outcomes. For instance, a person might follow what seems to be
the correct cutting motion, yet still produce irregular cucumber slices due to a slight misalignment in
technique. These errors may not be immediately apparent from the action itself but become evident
in the final result. To better support users in performing tasks, intelligent systems must therefore
assess not only how actions are performed, but also what those actions ultimately produce.

Existing mistake detection approaches focus primarily on modeling the execution process, assessing
correctness by analyzing motion patterns and action sequences. Previous works have explored such
methods in structured tasks, such as assembly (Sener et al., 2022) and cooking (Wang et al., 2023;
Peddi et al., 2023), often relying on frame-level classification or multimodal features. More recently,
Lee et al. (2024) introduced prototype learning to evaluate execution similarity across instances,
while Huang et al. (2025a) utilized task graphs to predict all possible next actions and compared
them with actual executions in the latent space. However, a shared limitation of these methods is
the assumption that mistakes can be identified solely from the execution process, without verifying
whether the final outcome aligns with the intended result.

In real-world scenarios, the execution may appear correct, yet minor deviations can lead to flawed
outcomes. As illustrated in Figure 1a, an imprecise stirring position might resemble a correct motion,
while the resulting spillage reveals the error. In Figure 1b, subtle differences in slicing technique
may produce irregularly shaped slices. These examples underscore a critical limitation: mistake
detection should account for not only the execution process but also the resulting action effect.

    1Project page: https://wenliangguo.github.io/Mistake_Detection

                                                           1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

                      Activity: Make Butter Corn Cup Action: Stir Mixture in the Bowl

                                 (a) Positional Mistake, i.e., spill out mixture onto table.
                       Activity: Make Cucumber Raita Action: Cut Cucumber to Pieces

                             (b) State mistake, i.e., cucumber is cut into unexpected shape.
Figure 1: Examples of two types of mistakes: object positional and state mistakes, in cooking
scenario from CaptainCook4D dataset (Peddi et al., 2023).

We address this challenge by casting mistake detection as a marginalization problem over latent
variables including potential action effects. Concretely, the probability of a mistake is modeled
as a joint function of both the execution of an action and its outcome. This probabilistic view
naturally decomposes the task into three subproblems: identifying the action effect, interpreting
the effect, and determining whether it reveals a mistake. Based on this formulation, we propose
Action Effect Modeling (AEM), a unified framework that enriches action representations with
effect-aware features. AEM first selects an effect frame that best reflects the result based on both
semantic relevance and visual quality. The action effect is then modeled from two complementary
perspectives: object states, which capture visual attributes such as shape and size changes, and
spatial relationships, which describe how objects are arranged relative to one another.
To learn robust and interpretable effect-aware representations, AEM leverages multimodal super-
vision from vision-language models (Hurst et al., 2024) through dual branches. The visual branch
encodes grounded object features and positions, while a textual branch constructs symbolic scene
graphs to extract attributes and relational descriptions. During training, these supervision signals are
aligned in a shared latent space via contrastive objectives, allowing the model to distill structured ef-
fect knowledge into a compact representation. At test time, the learned effect representation is fused
with the action segment features, providing enriched context for downstream mistake detection.
While action effects provide valuable cues, effective mistake detection also requires modeling the
execution itself. To this end, we develop a prompt-based detector that evaluates whether an action
segment aligns with its execution process within the task context. Rather than relying on frame-level
classifiers, our detector encodes each action using a learnable representation and aligns it with a task-
specific textual prompt in a contrastive manner. By modeling both the temporal dynamics and the
resulting effect of an action, the model captures rich semantic cues to distinguish subtle execution
errors as well as outcome discrepancies. Our approach is evaluated on two challenging egocentric
datasets, EgoPER (Lee et al., 2024) and CaptainCook4D (Peddi et al., 2023), achieving state-of-the-
art performance. Extensive ablations further demonstrate the necessity and effectiveness of action
effect modeling in improving mistake detection.
In summary, our contributions are threefold:

 • We formulate mistake detection as a probabilistic marginalization over latent action effects, de-
    composing the task into effect frame sampling, effect modeling, and mistake classification.

 • We propose Action Effect Modeling to learn effect-aware action representations by capturing
    object state and spatial relationships using complementary visual and symbolic cues.

 • We develop a prompt-based detector that aligns action segments with task-specific textual
    prompts, enabling effective detection of both execution errors and outcome errors in context.

2 RELATED WORK

Mistake Detection consists of two main branches: online detection (Jang et al., 2019; Ding et al.,
2023; Narasimhan et al., 2023; Ashutosh et al., 2024; Flaborea et al., 2024; Plini et al., 2024; Soran

                                                           2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

et al., 2015; Jang et al., 2023) and offline detection (Sener et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023; Haneji
et al., 2024; Peddi et al., 2023; Schoonbeek et al., 2024; Ghoddoosian et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2024;
Mazzamuto et al., 2024; Storks et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2025a). Online mistake detection focuses
on detecting sequential mistakes in real time, while offline detection aims to recognize incorrect
action execution. This work primarily addresses offline mistake detection.

Zooming into offline detection, early approaches relied on training binary classifiers with visual or
multimodal input (e.g., text, audio, depth) to learn implicit action representations, without explicitly
modeling the underlying action dynamics (Sener et al., 2022; Haneji et al., 2024; Peddi et al., 2023).
More recently, Lee et al. (2024) introduced a prototype-based method that explicitly models actions
by clustering features during training to learn representative action embeddings. Huang et al. (2025a)
utilized task graphs to predict possible next steps and reconstructed action feature in the latent space.
Both methods realized error detection through comparison of similarity between the predicted and
input action features at inference time.

While these methods achieve strong performance, they predominantly focus on modeling the execu-
tion process. However, the inherent variability of human behavior poses a significant challenge for
detecting fine-grained mistakes solely from execution dynamics. This limitation motivates us to go
beyond modeling the action itself by incorporating action effects as complementary signals, thereby
enhancing the robustness and reliability of mistake detection.

Video Anomaly Detection (Wu et al., 2019; Gong et al., 2019; Pu & Wu, 2022; Wu et al., 2022;
Al-Lahham et al., 2024; Pu et al., 2024) is closely related to mistake detection, where models are
typically trained on normal videos and identify anomalies as statistical deviations, without requiring
prior knowledge of specific abnormal events. However, mistake detection in procedural videos is in-
herently goal-oriented, as it requires an understanding of structured workflows to assess whether an
action is executed correctly. In addition, VAD is predominantly used in surveillance systems, where
the camera view remains fixed and the dynamics of the scene is relatively stable. In contrast, pro-
cedural videos, especially in egocentric views, involve more fine-grained human activities, explicit
scene transitions, and dynamic human motion, making action-effect modeling more challenging but
crucial for building life assistive system.

3 METHODOLOGY

3.1 PROBLEM FORMULATION

Given a procedural video corresponding to a predefined task, our goal is to determine whether each
segmented action is executed correctly or contains a mistake. We operate on non-overlapping seg-
ments, where each segment is denoted as a tuple s = (ts, te, a, y), with ts and te denoting the start
and end timestamps, a the action label, and y ∈ {0, 1} the binary mistake label (y = 1 indicates
a mistake). Following the one-class classification (OCC) setting (Lee et al., 2024; Huang et al.,
2025a), the training set includes only normal actions (y = 0), while the test set contains both correct
and erroneous segments.

Formally, the objective is to estimate the probability of a mistake given a visual representation of
the segment, expressed as P (yˆ | X), where X denotes the encoded segment feature and yˆ is the
predicted mistake label. Unlike prior methods that classify segments solely based on execution dy-
namics, we argue that procedural correctness depends on both the execution process and its outcome.
This motivates a probabilistic formulation in which mistake detection is expressed as a marginaliza-
tion over effect frames and the latent effect descriptors:

K

   P (yˆ | X, ei) · P (ei | fe, X) · P (fe | X),               (1)

i=1 fe mistake detection effect-aware learning frame sampling

where fe denotes the discrete effect frame sampled from the video, and ei represents the i-th possible
descriptor of the action effect extracted from fe. K is the total number of effect descriptors, which
in our case includes two complementary perspectives: object states and spatial relationships, as they

reveal common mistakes in procedural activities. Here we assume that once the segment feature
X and the effect descriptor ei are obtained, the specific effect frame fe does not provide additional

                                              3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

information for mistake prediction, i.e., yˆ ⊥ fe | (X, ei), and P (yˆ | X, ei, fe) = P (yˆ | X, ei).
Intuitively, Eq. 1 indicates that we consider every possible effect frame and each of its associated
action-effect descriptors, estimate the likelihood of each (fe, ei) combination, evaluate whether it
suggests a mistake, and then aggregate these weighted probabilities to obtain the final prediction.

This formulation provides a structured view of the mistake detection pipeline: frame sampling,
effect-aware learning, and mistake classification, bridging the gap between how an action is per-
formed and what outcomes it produces. Next, we will build a framework following this formulation.

3.2 FRAMEWORK OVERVIEW                                                      Detection Result

Figure 2 illustrates the overall framework. We first adopt                  Mistake Detection !(*)|#, &)
an action segmentation backbone to obtain frame-wise
features and non-overlapping action segments. The frame         ! "! #)     Action Effect Modeling        !(&|"!, #)
features are concatenated along the temporal dimension
based on segment boundaries. The resulting segment fea-       Effect Frame         Multimodal             Effect-Aware
tures X are fed into the Action Effect Modeling (AEM)           Sampling    Knowledge Extraction            Learning
module which (i) performs effect frame sampling P (fe |
X) to identify the frame most indicative of the outcome,                    Segment Features
(ii) extracts multimodal effect knowledge P (e | fe, X)
including object states and spatial relationships, and (iii)                ….
learns an effect-aware representation aligned across vi-
sual and symbolic cues. Finally, the enriched segment                   Action Segmentation Backbone
features are passed into the mistake detection module,
which models P (yˆ | X, e) using a prompt-based detector.                             Video Frames
In the following, we detail three core components: action
segmentation, effect modeling and mistake detection.                             ….

                                                              Figure 2: Framework overview.

3.3 ACTION SEGMENTATION

Following Lee et al. (2024) and Huang et al. (2025a), we adopt ActionFormer (Zhang et al., 2022) as
the action segmentation backbone, which outputs a feature pyramid with multi-scale temporal reso-
lutions. Inspired by prior work (Yang et al., 2024; Meng et al., 2020), we design a dynamic fusion
module to refine temporal representations by adaptively aggregating the multi-scale features from
the backbone, while preserving the hierarchical pyramid structure for segment boundary regression.
This design aims to provide more discriminative segment features X for subsequent action effect
modeling and mistake detection. Please refer to Appendix A for details about this module.

3.4 ACTION EFFECT MODELING

While the segment feature encodes the temporal dynamics of action execution, it is insufficient to
capture the subtle yet critical cues manifested in the action’s outcome. To bridge this gap, AEM
integrates action effects by extracting multimodal features from selected effect frames and using
them as external supervision. These features guide a learnable effect token, which distills outcome
semantics into the action representation. As illustrated in Figure 3, the entire AEM pipeline consists
of three steps: effect frame sampling, multimodal knowledge extraction, and effect-aware learning.
It produces enriched effect-aware action representations that capture both execution and outcome.

Effect Frame Sampling. To identify the frame that best captures the outcome of a given action,
we rank candidate frames within each action segment based on semantic relevance and visual clar-
ity. For semantic relevance, motivated by Niu et al. (2024), we use GPT-4o (Hurst et al., 2024) to
generate textual descriptions of the anticipated post-action states. Then we compute the frame-wise
similarity between the segment’s visual feature X and the description embeddings obtained from a
pre-trained text encoder, followed by softmax normalization. For visual clarity, we apply the Lapla-
cian operator to estimate the sharpness of each frame within the segment and normalize the scores
between the 5th and 95th percentiles. The final ranking score combines both semantic relevance
and visual clarity, and the top-ranked frame is selected as the effect frame.

Multimodal Knowledge Extraction. From the selected effect frame, we extract cues capturing
both object states and spatial configurations, as they can reveal errors that occur in most procedural

                                              4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

          Effect Frame Sampling                                Multimodal Knowledge Extraction                                Effect-Aware Learning
                                                                                                                          ℒ%&& $! $"
[Task] Make coffee [Step] Pour water on grounds                             Grounding DINO Objects

                User Prompt:                                                                              Φ(#) Θ" !!
                For the [Step] in [Task], you should:
                (1) Predict the Subject and Object involved    Object Vocab.                                                                                               Repeat &
                                                                                                                                                                           Concatenate
                     in this action,                                                                      Φ(#)                                              Θ#"       Θ#!
                (2) Describe their Resulting States after the                                                                                                                   Linear
                                                                                                          Ψ(#) Θ! !"         EFT Token                                          Layer
                     action is complete.
                                                               Effect Frame "!                                                    $     Transformer Layers
                GPT-4o Response:                                                                                        ℒ#$
                Object: Coffee Kettle
                Subject: Coffee Grounds                                                 Spatial Relation
                State: Coffee grounds appear wet and evenly
                saturated, the brewed coffee drips into
                container.

                                                                                                          +"        "!

                                                               Prompt:

                                                               “You should                            "#

Semantic Score 0.12      0.45    0.43                          recognize the

                                                               objects and      GPT-4o     +              +# ""

Quality Score      0.97  0.37    0.95                          generate scene

                                                               graph …”                                                   %                                                %&

Final Score        0.55  0.41    0.69                                         Object       Attribute      Relation

Figure 3: Overview of the Action Effect Modeling (AEM) module. Effect frame sampling and
multimodal knowledge extraction are only used to learn effect state and relation projectors Θs, Θr
during training. Both of them are skipped during testing.

activities. We adopt a dual-branch strategy: a visual branch for grounded object-centric features,
and a textual branch for symbolic scene abstraction.

In the visual branch, we use Grounding DINO (Liu et al., 2024) to detect relevant objects, then we
extract object state and relation features vs, vr by concatenating and projecting embeddings:

                   vs = Θs Φ(fe) ∥ (Φ(feoi ) i=1 N ) , vr = Θr Φ(fe) ∥ (Ψ(peoi ) i=1 N ) , (2)

where  fe      is  the   effect  frame,  f oi                  is  the   cropped        i-th  object            regions,  and  poi      is                       the  corresponding

                                           e                                                                                     e

coordinates of the object bounding boxes. Φ(·) is a pre-trained image encoder, Ψ(·) is a positional

encoding layer, and Θs, Θr are two different multilayer perceptrons (MLPs). ∥ denotes channel-wise

                                        N

concatenation, and (·) i=1 represents the successive concatenation of multiple embeddings.

Although visual grounding provides object-centric features that capture appearance and spatial cues
from the effect frame, it lacks high-level semantic abstraction and relational reasoning. To address
this, we introduce a textual scene graph branch to model the symbolic structure of the action effect.
Given an effect frame and objects detected by Grounding DINO, we leverage the recognition and
reasoning capabilities of a Multimodal Large Language Model (MLLM) by prompting GPT-4o to
generate a scene graph G = (V, E), where V contains three types of nodes: object, relation, and
attribute, and E represents the set of directed edges. We encode the textual labels of all nodes in V
using a pre-trained text encoder to obtain node embeddings, which are then fed into a Graph Neural
Network (GNN) (Velicˇkovic´ et al., 2017) to compute context-aware features tv for each node.

To abstract finer-grained effect information from text modality, we propose to decompose the gen-
erated scene graph G into two disentangled subgraphs: a state subgraph Gs = (Vs, Es) and a relation
subgraph Gr = (Vr, Er). Specifically, the state subgraph includes the object nodes along with their
adjacent attribute nodes, capturing object-level changes such as color or texture. The relation sub-

graph consists of the same object nodes and the intermediate relation node connecting them, repre-
senting spatial relationships such as “above” or “inside.”Given tv as the GNN feature of each node,
we compute the textual features for object states and spatial relations by applying the following
average pooling over subgraphs, where |Vs| and |Vr| are the number of nodes in each subgraph:

                                                               ts = v∈Vs tv , tr = v∈Vr tv , (3)
                                                                         |Vs|                             |Vr |

Effect-Aware Learning. After acquiring multimodal effect features, a central challenge is how to
effectively integrate these features into the action representation. A naive approach is to concatenate
the effect and action segment features, but this would require querying MLLMs during inference,
introducing prohibitive computational overhead. To circumvent this, we treat the effect features as
supervision signals and employ a distillation-inspired strategy. Specifically, we introduce a learn-
able effect token that implicitly captures task-specific action effects through self-attention. During
training, this token is aligned with the multimodal effect features to distill external knowledge into a

                                                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

compact representation. Crucially, at inference time the framework relies only on the learned token,
eliminating any dependency on external models to ensure efficient deployment.

As shown in Figure 3, we append the learnable effect token e to the segment-level features, which
are then fed into Transformer encoding layers for temporal modeling. Subsequently, we align the
projected effect tokens with the multimodal effect features in the state and relation latent spaces,
respectively, which is formulated as:

                                  Lseff = ||Θs(e) − vs||2 + ||Θs(e) − ts||2,
                                                                                                                    (4)

                                  Lreff = ||Θr(e) − vr||2 + ||Θr(e) − tr||2,

where Θs(·) and Θr(·) are spatial and relation projection layers, respectively. This enables efficient
learning of a compact and generalizable effect-aware representation without relying on expensive
effect-frame computation by MLLMs during inference time.

To enhance the consistency between the two supervision signals, we introduce a contrastive objective

that explicitly aligns their visual and textual representations. While the effect loss encourages the

learnable token to match each modality individually, this objective ensures that both modalities

encode the same underlying semantics from complementary perspectives. Taking the object state as

an example, we treat the visual and textual features (vs, ts) as positive pairs, and all other samples

in the batch as negatives. The contrastive loss is formulated as:
                                                                                            

                                LsCL = − log exp cos(vsi , tis)/ρ  , (5)
                                                          j exp   cos(v     i  ,   j  )/ρ
                                           i                                s
                                                                                  ts

where i and j index samples in the batch, cos(·) denotes the cosine similarity, and ρ is a temperature

coefficient.  Similarly,  we    can  calculate   the  relation  contrastive       loss   as  LCL.    Together,  these   objec-

                                                                                               r

tives enable the effect token to learn a compact multimodal representation of action effects, which

is further integrated into the segment features as:

                                           X = F (X ∥ Θs(e) ∥ Θr(e))                                                    (6)

where ∥ denotes channel-wise concatenation and F (·) is a linear projection layer. The resulting
fused segment features serve as a strong signal for downstream mistake detection.

3.5 MISTAKE DETECTION

Following previous work (Lee et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2025a), we adopt an one-class classification
(OCC) setting for mistake detection, which learns canonical action patterns from correct samples
only. Given the effect-enhanced segment features, we first perform an average-pooling over the

enhanced effect-aware segment feature X across temporal dimension to obtain the action embedding
xa. Instead of learning a binary classifier, we introduce a prompt-based detector to increase task-
specific discriminability. For each action label a, we construct a template-based textual prompt Pa
(e.g., “An image showing [ACTION] for [TASK]”), and obtain its representation by:

                                     ya = E (p ∥ Embed(Tokenize(Pa))) ,                                                 (7)

where p is a learnable prefix embedding and E(·) is the frozen text encoder. ∥ denotes concatenation.

During training, we align the action embedding with its corresponding prompt features while re-
pulsing it from other prompt embeddings through a contrastive objective:

                                        1     B              exp  cos(x  i  ,  yi   )/ρ
                                                                         a
                          det                    log C                           a              ,
                          L =−                                                                                          (8)
                                        B i=1             c=1 exp (cos(xia, yac )/ρ)

where  xi   denotes  the  i-th  action  embedding     in  a  mini-batch  B,       and  C   is   the  total  number  of  actions

         a

in a specific task. During inference, we compute the similarity score sim(xa, ya) between the

action embedding and its corresponding textual prompt by sim(xa, ya) = cos(xa, ya)/ρ. The final

prediction of mistake probability can be obtained by P (yˆ | X, e) = 1 − sim(xa, ya). The mistake

detection result is determined by thresholding the mistake probability:

                                          yˆ = 1, P (yˆ | X, e) > τ, (9)
                                                  0, otherwise.

where yˆ is the predicted mistake label and τ is a predefined threshold.

                                                             6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Table 1: Mistake detection results on the EgoPER dataset (Lee et al., 2024). AUC and EDA are in
percentage (%). Best results are bold, and second-best are underlined.

Method             Quesadilla     Oatmeal       Pinwheel      Coffee        Tea       All
                  AUC EDA      AUC EDA        AUC EDA     AUC EDA     AUC EDA    AUC EDA
Random
HF2-VAD           50.0 19.9    50.0 11.8      50.0 15.7   50.0 8.2    50.0 17.0  50.0 14.5
HF2-VAD + SSPCAB  62.6 34.5    62.3 25.4      52.7 29.1   59.6 10.0   62.1 36.6  59.9 27.1
S3R               60.9 30.4    61.9 25.3      51.7 33.9   60.1 10.0   63.2 35.4  59.6 27.0
EgoPED            51.8 52.6    61.6 47.8      52.4 50.5   51.0 16.3   57.9 47.8  54.9 43.0
AMNAR             65.6 62.7    65.1 51.4      55.0 59.6   58.3 55.3   66.0 56.0  62.0 57.0
                  71.9 61.4    75.4 65.0      65.4 65.0   67.8 73.5   61.9 57.0  68.5 64.4
Ours
                  80.8 68.1    77.0 68.6      69.9 61.2   70.3 66.4   71.1 69.4  73.8 66.7

Table 2: Mistake detection results on the CaptainCook4D dataset (Peddi et al., 2023).

                               Method  Precision  AUC     EDA

                               Random    44.9     51.2    49.7
                               EgoPED    56.5     54.9    69.8
                               AMNAR     66.8     60.2    72.3
                               Ours      68.1     62.5    71.9

3.6 TRAINING OBJECTIVE

Finally, we jointly optimize three objectives to train the model in an end-to-end fashion: the seg-
mentation loss Lseg following Zhang et al. (2022), the action-effect modeling loss Leff and LCL, and
the mistake detection loss Ldet. The overall training objective is defined as:

                               L = Lseg + Leff + LCL + Ldet,                           (10)

where Leff and LCL comprise both state and relation terms. By incorporating action-effect modeling
into the training process, our framework learns to attend to semantically meaningful object state
transitions and spatial relationships, thereby enhancing both representation and mistake detection.

4 EXPERIMENTS

4.1 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

Mistake Datasets. We evaluate our method on two egocentric video datasets: EgoPER (Lee et al.,
2024) and CaptainCook4D (Huang et al., 2025a). The EgoPER dataset consists of 385 egocentric
cooking videos spanning 5 recipe categories, with a total duration of 28 hours. Among these, 213
videos contain only correct actions, while the remaining 178 include various execution mistakes.
Following Lee et al. (2024), we use 80% of the normal videos for training, 10% for validation,
and the remaining 10% together with all erroneous videos for testing. The CaptainCook4D dataset
contains 384 videos covering 24 recipes, with a total length of 94.5 hours. Among all recordings,
164 are labeled as normal, while the remaining 220 videos include incorrect action steps. Following
Huang et al. (2025a), we use all normal recordings for training and the erroneous ones for testing.

Evaluation Metrics. We follow prior work (Lee et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2025a) by using Area
Under the Curve (AUC) and Error Detection Accuracy (EDA) to jointly measure model’s ability
to distinguish correct and erroneous actions within each video. AUC assesses frame-level discrim-
ination between errors and non-errors, whereas EDA measures segment-level detection accuracy.
Both metrics are computed by aggregating detection results across a densely sampled threshold
range from 0 to 1, rather than relying on a single fixed threshold, enabling a more comprehensive
evaluation of the model’s behavior across the full spectrum of thresholds.

Implementation Details. We use off-the-shelf EVA-02 CLIP (Fang et al., 2024) for all image and
text encoding. For the EgoPER dataset, we follow Lee et al. (2024) to use additional features based
on Active Object Detection (AOD). For effect frame sampling, the final score is an average of the se-
mantic relevance and visual quality scores. Following Lee et al. (2024) and Huang et al. (2025a), we

                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Table 3: Ablation studies (a–d), action segmentation results (e), and performance comparison with
different scene graph generation models (f) on EgoPER dataset (Lee et al., 2024).

(a) Alignment between multimodal supervision with            (b) Effect-frame sampling strategies.
the projected state and relation effect tokens.

AEM         Lseff Lreff                 AUC   EDA            Method      AUC        EDA
  ✗  Visual Textual Visual Textual
                                        67.6  65.6           w/o Effect  67.6       65.6
  ✓                N/A                                       Last Frame  70.6       65.7
                                        67.9  65.8           Ours        73.8       66.7
                                        68.4  66.1
     ✗          ✗        ✗  ✗           69.4  66.3
                                        71.7  66.4
     ✓          ✓        ✗  ✗           69.9  66.0           (c) Dynamic cross-level interactions.
                                        73.8  66.7
     ✗          ✗        ✓  ✓

     ✓          ✗        ✓  ✗                                Method      AUC        EDA

     ✗          ✓        ✗  ✓                                AMNAR       68.5       64.4
                                                             w/o Dyn     71.8       63.4
     ✓          ✓        ✓  ✓                                w/ Dyn      73.8       66.7

(d) Alignment of supervisions in state and relation spaces.

                                                             (e) Action segmentation performance.

          LsCL     LrCL     AUC         EDA

          ✗        ✗        66.8        64.7                 Method IoU Edit F1@0.5 Acc

          ✓        ✗        69.9        64.5                 EgoPED 44.6 61.3 47.5 68.5

          ✗        ✓        72.6        65.1                 AMNAR 56.3 69.4 57.3 75.3

          ✓        ✓        73.8        66.7                 Ours        58.5 69.7 58.5 73.5

     (f) Performance comparison of our method with different scene graph generation models.

Models     Quesadilla          Oatmeal    Pinwheel               Coffee        Tea       All
          AUC EDA           AUC EDA     AUC EDA              AUC EDA     AUC EDA    AUC EDA
Qwen3-VL
GPT-4o    77.8 69.0         77.3 68.8   70.0 62.2            70.2 64.3   71.4 68.7  73.3 66.6
          80.8 68.1         77.0 68.6   69.9 61.2            70.3 66.4   71.1 69.4  73.8 66.7

independently train and test the model in each recipe and report the average of all recipes as the final
performance. Both the effect-frame sampling and multimodal knowledge extraction are performed
during the data pre-processing stage to avoid additional training overhead. All experiments were
conducted with an NVIDIA RTX 6000 Ada GPU (48GB memory). More implementation details
can be found in the Appendix A.

4.2 COMPARISON WITH STATE-OF-THE-ART

We compare our methods with video anomaly detection methods HF2-VAD (Liu et al., 2021), HF2-
VAD + SSPCAB (Ristea et al., 2022) and S3R (Wu et al., 2022), as well as mistake detection
methods EgoPED (Lee et al., 2024) and AMNAR (Huang et al., 2025a). As shown in Table 1,
on the EgoPER dataset, our method outperforms in both metrics on most of the five tasks, with an
average improvement of 5.3% on AUC and 2.3% on EDA. The results in Table 2 further demonstrate
its effectiveness on the CaptainCook4D dataset, surpassing AMNAR by 2.7% in Precision and 2.3%
in AUC. On both datasets, our EDA is occasionally lower than that of AMNAR. This gap is likely
due to AMNAR’s use of a dynamic programming block to construct task graphs that mitigate noise
in action-segment labels. Since incorporating task graphs lies beyond the scope of our work, we
leave it for future exploration.

4.3 ABLATION STUDIES

In the ablation study, we aim to answer the following questions:
1. Is Action Effect Modeling effective and generalizable?
2. Which is more important: object state effect or spatial relation effect?
3. How do visual and textual signals contribute to AEM?

                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

4. Is aligning external multimodal features necessary?
5. How do different effect-frame sampling strategies perform?
6. Does multi-scale dynamic fusion module contribute to mistake detection?
7. Can open-source MLLMs replace the expensive closed-source models?

1) Action Effect Modeling. As shown in Table 3a, the first row reports the performance of baseline,
which already achieves a comparable performance to AMNAR. This is attributed to the prompt-
based detector’s ability to capture task-specific action representations, thereby enhancing the dis-
criminability of action execution. The 2nd row further demonstrates that the learnable token can
implicitly model action effects without relying on contextual knowledge provided by Grounding
DINO or GPT-4o. After introducing different forms of external supervision, our model achieves
consistent improvements, verifying its generalizability. Finally, when combining all multimodal ef-
fect supervision signals, our model achieves the best performance due to supervised effect modeling.

2) State vs. Relation Effect. The 3rd and 4th rows of Table 3a show the impact of state and relational
effects. Compared to implicit token learning, explicitly introducing supervision signals for state or
relational effects leads to performance gains, where relational supervision performs better, yielding
a 1.0% improvement in AUC over state supervision. We argue that spatial relationships between ob-
jects provide more consistent and discriminative cues for action correctness. In contrast, object state
changes are often subtle and visually ambiguous, making them more difficult to capture reliably.

3) Visual vs. Textual Supervision. The 5th and 6th rows of Table 3a report the impact of incorporating
visual and textual features as external knowledge. Compared to baseline, using visual features
improves AUC to 71.7% and EDA to 66.4%, while textual features yield a smaller gain. We argue
that visual features are more effective because they directly capture object appearance and spatial
layout, offering fine-grained cues to reflect execution-related visual differences. In contrast, textual
features, although semantically informative, are abstracted from generated scene graphs and may
introduce noise or miss subtle visual distinctions in complex egocentric environments.

4) Effect Feature Alignment. We further study the impact of aligning multimodal supervision fea-
tures in state and relation effect representation spaces. As shown in Table 3d, using unaligned visual
and textual supervisions leads to a suboptimal AUC of 66.8% and EDA of 64.7%, even lower than
the model without effect modeling, highlighting the importance of cross-modal alignment. Intro-
ducing contrastive alignment in either the state space or the relation space improves AUC to 69.9%
and 72.6%, improves EDA to 64.5% and 65.1%. The stronger gain from relation alignment suggests
that object spatial relationships play a more critical role in modeling action effects. Finally, aligning
both state and relation representations achieves the best AUC, demonstrating the complementary
nature of these two effect types and the effectiveness of joint cross-modal supervision.

5) Effect Frame Sampling. To assess the effectiveness of our effect-frame sampling strategy, we
compare it with a naive baseline that selects the last frame of each action segment, assuming that
action effects are most visible at the end. As shown in Table 3b, this heuristic raises AUC to 70.6%,
confirming that incorporating effect information benefits mistake detection. In contrast, our pro-
posed strategy, which jointly considers semantic relevance and visual clarity further, boosts AUC
to 73.8% and EDA to 66.7%. These results imply that a more informed selection of effect frames
yields more discriminative representations, thereby improving detection performance.

6) Dynamic Fusion Module. Table 3c evaluates whether enhancing multi-scale temporal represen-
tations contributes to the final detection performance. The results show that incorporating dynamic
fusion yields a 2% improvement in AUC and a 3.3% gain in EDA, highlighting the importance of
expressive action segment representations for downstream mistake detection. Notably, even with-
out this module, our model still surpasses AMNAR by 3.3% AUC and achieves comparable EDA,
further highlighting the superiority of our overall framework.

7) Alternative open-source MLLM. In this work, we employ a state-of-the-art closed-source MLLM
GPT-4o (Hurst et al., 2024) to generate action scene graphs that provide supervision signals for our
method. To assess whether alternative models can fulfill the same role, we replace GPT-4o with
the latest open-source MLLM Qwen3-VL (30B) (Bai et al., 2025). As shown in Table 3f, the scene
graphs generated by Qwen3-VL yield mistake detection performance comparable to that by GPT-
4o, indicating that open-source models can serve as a cost-effective alternative for the generation of
scene graphs while maintaining strong performance.

                                                           9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Action: Put Tortilla on Cutting Board Mistake: Put Tortilla on Table               0.8
                                                                                   0.6
                                                                                   0.4
                                                                                   0.2

                                                                                            Ew ffe /o ct w/ Effect

Action: Fold Tortilla into Half-Circle Mistake: Fold Tortilla into Quarter-Circle  0.8
                                                                                   0.6
                                                                                   0.4
                                                                                   0.2

                                                                                            Ew ffe /o ct w/ Effect

Action: Weigh Coffee Beans  Mistake: Spill out Coffee Beans                        0.8
                                                                                   0.6
                                                                                   0.4
                                                                                   0.2

                                                                                             Ew ffe /o ct w/ Effect

Action: Stir Mixture using Spoon Mistake: Stir Mixture using Knife                 0.8
                                                                                   0.6
                                                                                   0.4
                                                                                   0.2

                                                                                            Ew ffe /o ct w/ Effect

Figure 4: Examples of mistakes occurring in different actions. The right bar charts show mistake
probabilities predicted by models without (in blue) and with (in orange) effect modeling. Red boxes
in images are only used to highlight mistake regions for clearer visualization.

4.4 ACTION SEGMENTATION

Table 3e presents a comparison of action segmentation performance. All models, including ours, use
ActionFormer (Zhang et al., 2022) as the segmentation backbone, ensuring a fair comparison. Our
approach outperforms prior methods across most evaluation metrics, highlighting its effectiveness
in enhancing action segmentation in addition to mistake detection. These results also indicate that
our framework holds promise for broader video understanding tasks where action effects serve as
critical cues, such as action recognition (Bao et al., 2021) and action analysis (Huang et al., 2025b).

4.5 QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS

Figure 4 shows visualizations of the action segments and the prediction of mistake probabilities.
The results highlight two key advantages of our approach: (i) the model effectively detects errors
that appear in the final outcomes through action–effect modeling (row 1 to row 3), and (ii) it can
also identify execution errors that arise during the process enabled by the prompt-based detector,
even when the visual outcome seems correct (row 4). Together, these findings demonstrate the com-
plementarity between effect-aware representations and temporal execution modeling in capturing a
broader spectrum of procedural errors. More visualization can be found in the Appendix C.

5 CONCLUSION

We presented a unified framework for procedural mistake detection that explicitly models the re-
lationship between action execution and its resulting effect. The proposed Action Effect Modeling
(AEM) enriches action representations with effect-aware cues by integrating object states and spa-
tial relationships, guided through multimodal supervision. Combined with a prompt-based detector,
our framework effectively captures both subtle execution errors and outcome discrepancies, achiev-
ing substantial improvements over prior methods on mistake detection benchmarks. Future work
includes extending the framework to spatial-temporal action effect modeling for long-range pro-
cedural reasoning and improving mistake interpretability via human-understandable explanations
generated by Large Language Models (LLMs).

                                                          10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This research was partially sponsored by the MSU Jenison Fund and Army Research Office (un-
der Grant Number W911NF-24-1-0385). The views and conclusions contained in this document
are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either
expressed or implied, of the Army Research Office or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Govern-
ment is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding
any copyright notation herein. The authors thank Wentao Bao for insightful suggestions on the
methodological aspects of this work.

REFERENCES

Anas Al-Lahham, Nurbek Tastan, Muhammad Zaigham Zaheer, and Karthik Nandakumar. A
   coarse-to-fine pseudo-labeling (c2fpl) framework for unsupervised video anomaly detection. In
   Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 6793–
   6802, 2024.

Kumar Ashutosh, Santhosh Kumar Ramakrishnan, Triantafyllos Afouras, and Kristen Grauman.
   Video-mined task graphs for keystep recognition in instructional videos. Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen, Xionghui Chen, Zesen Cheng, Lianghao Deng,
   Wei Ding, Chang Gao, Chunjiang Ge, Wenbin Ge, Zhifang Guo, Qidong Huang, Jie Huang, Fei
   Huang, Binyuan Hui, Shutong Jiang, Zhaohai Li, Mingsheng Li, Mei Li, Kaixin Li, Zicheng Lin,
   Junyang Lin, Xuejing Liu, Jiawei Liu, Chenglong Liu, Yang Liu, Dayiheng Liu, Shixuan Liu,
   Dunjie Lu, Ruilin Luo, Chenxu Lv, Rui Men, Lingchen Meng, Xuancheng Ren, Xingzhang Ren,
   Sibo Song, Yuchong Sun, Jun Tang, Jianhong Tu, Jianqiang Wan, Peng Wang, Pengfei Wang, Qi-
   uyue Wang, Yuxuan Wang, Tianbao Xie, Yiheng Xu, Haiyang Xu, Jin Xu, Zhibo Yang, Mingkun
   Yang, Jianxin Yang, An Yang, Bowen Yu, Fei Zhang, Hang Zhang, Xi Zhang, Bo Zheng, Hu-
   men Zhong, Jingren Zhou, Fan Zhou, Jing Zhou, Yuanzhi Zhu, and Ke Zhu. Qwen3-vl technical
   report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21631, 2025.

Wentao Bao, Qi Yu, and Yu Kong. Evidential deep learning for open set action recognition. In
   Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 13349–13358,
   2021.

Guodong Ding, Fadime Sener, Shugao Ma, and Angela Yao. Every mistake counts in assembly.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.16453, 2023.

Yuxin Fang, Quan Sun, Xinggang Wang, Tiejun Huang, Xinlong Wang, and Yue Cao. Eva-02: A
   visual representation for neon genesis. Image and Vision Computing, pp. 105171, 2024.

Alessandro Flaborea, Guido Maria D’Amely di Melendugno, Leonardo Plini, Luca Scofano,
   Edoardo De Matteis, Antonino Furnari, Giovanni Maria Farinella, and Fabio Galasso. Prego:
   online mistake detection in procedural egocentric videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
   ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18483–18492, 2024.

Reza Ghoddoosian, Isht Dwivedi, Nakul Agarwal, and Behzad Dariush. Weakly-supervised action
   segmentation and unseen error detection in anomalous instructional videos. In Proceedings of the
   IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 10128–10138, 2023.

Dong Gong, Lingqiao Liu, Vuong Le, Budhaditya Saha, Moussa Reda Mansour, Svetha Venkatesh,
   and Anton van den Hengel. Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memory-augmented deep
   autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international
   conference on computer vision, pp. 1705–1714, 2019.

Yuto Haneji, Taichi Nishimura, Hirotaka Kameko, Keisuke Shirai, Tomoya Yoshida, Keiya Ka-
   jimura, Koki Yamamoto, Taiyu Cui, Tomohiro Nishimoto, and Shinsuke Mori. Egooops: A
   dataset for mistake action detection from egocentric videos with procedural texts. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2410.05343, 2024.

                                                          11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Wei-Jin Huang, Yuan-Ming Li, Zhi-Wei Xia, Yu-Ming Tang, Kun-Yu Lin, Jian-Fang Hu, and Wei-
   Shi Zheng. Modeling multiple normal action representations for error detection in procedural
   tasks. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, pp. 27794–
   27804, 2025a.

Zhanbo Huang, Xiaoming Liu, and Yu Kong. H-more: Learning human-centric motion representa-
   tion for action analysis. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Confer-
   ence, pp. 22702–22713, 2025b.

Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Os-
   trow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, et al. Gpt-4o system card. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2410.21276, 2024.

Youngkyoon Jang, Brian Sullivan, Casimir Ludwig, Iain Gilchrist, Dima Damen, and Walterio
   Mayol-Cuevas. Epic-tent: An egocentric video dataset for camping tent assembly. In Proceedings
   of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops, pp. 0–0, 2019.

Yunseok Jang, Sungryull Sohn, Lajanugen Logeswaran, Tiange Luo, Moontae Lee, and Honglak
   Lee. Multimodal subtask graph generation from instructional videos. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2302.08672, 2023.

Shih-Po Lee, Zijia Lu, Zekun Zhang, Minh Hoai, and Ehsan Elhamifar. Error detection in egocentric
   procedural task videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
   Pattern Recognition, pp. 18655–18666, 2024.

Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2101.00190, 2021.

Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Qing Jiang, Chunyuan
   Li, Jianwei Yang, Hang Su, et al. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training
   for open-set object detection. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 38–55. Springer,
   2024.

Zhian Liu, Yongwei Nie, Chengjiang Long, Qing Zhang, and Guiqing Li. A hybrid video anomaly
   detection framework via memory-augmented flow reconstruction and flow-guided frame predic-
   tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 13588–
   13597, 2021.

Michele Mazzamuto, Antonino Furnari, and Giovanni Maria Farinella. Eyes wide unshut: Unsu-
   pervised mistake detection in egocentric video by detecting unpredictable gaze. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2406.08379, 2024.

Yue Meng, Chung-Ching Lin, Rameswar Panda, Prasanna Sattigeri, Leonid Karlinsky, Aude Oliva,
   Kate Saenko, and Rogerio Feris. Ar-net: Adaptive frame resolution for efficient action recogni-
   tion. In European conference on computer vision, pp. 86–104. Springer, 2020.

Medhini Narasimhan, Licheng Yu, Sean Bell, Ning Zhang, and Trevor Darrell. Learning and verifi-
   cation of task structure in instructional videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13519, 2023.

Yulei Niu, Wenliang Guo, Long Chen, Xudong Lin, and Shih-Fu Chang. Schema: State changes
   matter for procedure planning in instructional videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.01599, 2024.

OpenAI. Gpt-5: Large language model, 2025. URL https://openai.com/index/
   introducing-gpt-5/. Accessed: 2025-11-13.

Rohith Peddi, Shivvrat Arya, Bharath Challa, Likhitha Pallapothula, Akshay Vyas, Jikai Wang,
   Qifan Zhang, Vasundhara Komaragiri, Eric Ragan, Nicholas Ruozzi, et al. Captaincook4d: A
   dataset for understanding errors in procedural activities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14556, 2023.

Leonardo Plini, Luca Scofano, Edoardo De Matteis, Guido Maria D’Amely di Melendugno,
   Alessandro Flaborea, Andrea Sanchietti, Giovanni Maria Farinella, Fabio Galasso, and Antonino
   Furnari. Ti-prego: Chain of thought and in-context learning for online mistake detection in pro-
   cedural egocentric videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.02570, 2024.

                                                          12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Yujiang Pu and Xiaoyu Wu. Audio-guided attention network for weakly supervised violence detec-
   tion. In 2022 2nd International Conference on Consumer Electronics and Computer Engineering
   (ICCECE), pp. 219–223. IEEE, 2022.

Yujiang Pu, Xiaoyu Wu, Lulu Yang, and Shengjin Wang. Learning prompt-enhanced context fea-
   tures for weakly-supervised video anomaly detection. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing,
   2024.

Nicolae-Ca˘ta˘lin Ristea, Neelu Madan, Radu Tudor Ionescu, Kamal Nasrollahi, Fahad Shahbaz
   Khan, Thomas B Moeslund, and Mubarak Shah. Self-supervised predictive convolutional at-
   tentive block for anomaly detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
   vision and pattern recognition, pp. 13576–13586, 2022.

Tim J Schoonbeek, Tim Houben, Hans Onvlee, Fons Van der Sommen, et al. Industreal: A dataset
   for procedure step recognition handling execution errors in egocentric videos in an industrial-like
   setting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision,
   pp. 4365–4374, 2024.

Fadime Sener, Dibyadip Chatterjee, Daniel Shelepov, Kun He, Dipika Singhania, Robert Wang,
   and Angela Yao. Assembly101: A large-scale multi-view video dataset for understanding pro-
   cedural activities. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
   Recognition, pp. 21096–21106, 2022.

Bilge Soran, Ali Farhadi, and Linda Shapiro. Generating notifications for missing actions: Don’t
   forget to turn the lights off! In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer
   Vision, pp. 4669–4677, 2015.

Shane Storks, Itamar Bar-Yossef, Yayuan Li, Zheyuan Zhang, Jason J Corso, and Joyce Chai. Ex-
   plainable procedural mistake detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.11927, 2024.

Petar Velicˇkovic´, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Lio, and Yoshua
   Bengio. Graph attention networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10903, 2017.

Xin Wang, Taein Kwon, Mahdi Rad, Bowen Pan, Ishani Chakraborty, Sean Andrist, Dan Bohus,
   Ashley Feniello, Bugra Tekin, Felipe Vieira Frujeri, et al. Holoassist: an egocentric human in-
   teraction dataset for interactive ai assistants in the real world. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
   International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 20270–20281, 2023.

Jhih-Ciang Wu, He-Yen Hsieh, Ding-Jie Chen, Chiou-Shann Fuh, and Tyng-Luh Liu. Self-
   supervised sparse representation for video anomaly detection. In European Conference on Com-
   puter Vision, pp. 729–745. Springer, 2022.

Peng Wu, Jing Liu, and Fang Shen. A deep one-class neural network for anomalous event detection
   in complex scenes. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems, 31(7):2609–
   2622, 2019.

Le Yang, Ziwei Zheng, Yizeng Han, Hao Cheng, Shiji Song, Gao Huang, and Fan Li. Dyfadet:
   Dynamic feature aggregation for temporal action detection. In European Conference on Computer
   Vision (ECCV), 2024.

Chen-Lin Zhang, Jianxin Wu, and Yin Li. Actionformer: Localizing moments of actions with
   transformers. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 492–510. Springer, 2022.

                                                          13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

APPENDIX

This appendix is organized as follows:
 • Appendix A introduces more details about the implementation.
 • Appendix B presents more experimental results and analysis.
 • Appendix C provides more visualizations for demonstration.
 • Appendix D shares further discussion on limitations and future directions.
 • Appendix E clarifies the use of the large language model.

A IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS

A.1 DYNAMIC FUSION MODULE

As described in Section 3, we design a simple yet effective dynamic fusion module to bridge inter-
actions among multi-scale frame features produced by the ActionFormer backbone, thereby refining
temporal representations. The internal structure of this module is illustrated in Figure 5. Frame
features at each level, with different temporal lengths, are first passed through a convolutional layer
followed by a normalization layer to capture temporal information at varying granularities. For each
feature, the features from its adjacent levels are up-sampled or down-sampled along the temporal
dimension via linear interpolation to match its length, after which a weighted sum is applied. The
weights are learnable and specific to each feature. The resulting features preserve their original
length and dimensionality while being enriched with aggregated temporal information. An ablation
study in Table 3e validates the effectiveness of this dynamic fusion module for mistake detection.

Video Frames                                  Multi-scale                          Temporally Enhanced
                                            Frame Feature                       Multi-scale Frame Feature

              Action Segmentation Backbone                     Conv & Norm  WS

                                                               Conv & Norm  WS

….                                                             Conv & Norm  WS

                                                               Conv & Norm  WS

Figure 5: Structure of the dynamic fusion module. Each Conv&Norm block represents a convolu-
tional layer followed by a normalization layer, and each WS block denotes a weighted-sum operation.

A.2 EFFECT-FRAME SAMPLING

In this work, we perform action-effect modeling by leveraging the effect knowledge embedded in
effect frames. To sample effect frames within action segments, we first predict key objects that
indicate the action effect and then apply semantic scoring to evaluate the relevance of each video
frame to the effect. Figure 7a presents the complete GPT-4o prompt used for key-object prediction
and generation of textual effect descriptions.

A.3 ACTION SCENE GRAPH

In this work, we construct a symbolic action scene graph from sampled effect frames to generate
textual supervision for effect learning. This subsection details the implementation of the action scene
graph, including: (1) generating the scene graph by prompting GPT-4o and parsing its output, (2)
decomposing the graph into object-state and spatial-relation subgraphs, and (3) presenting a concrete
example that illustrates the overall process.

A.3.1 SCENE GRAPH CONSTRUCTION

We prompt the powerful GPT-4o to recognize the action scene and output the scene information.
Figure 7b shows the complete prompt we used. Scene information is returned in the format of the

                                                           14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

dictionary (JSON file), and we design algorithms to parse the output and construct the action scene
graph based on it. Algorithm 1 describes the graph construction process, where the input includes
the object relation dictionary (Relation Dict) and the object attribute dictionary (Attribute Dict) gen-
erated by the VLM. The output consists of two dictionaries: one containing the graph nodes catego-
rized by type (Nodes) and the other storing the edges connecting pairs of nodes (Nodes).

A.3.2 ACTION SCENE GRAPH DECOMPOSITION

Algorithm 2 describes the graph decomposition process, where the input includes Nodes and Nodes
obtained from graph construction, as well as the specified action-related objects generated by effect
frame sampling. The outputs are separate sub-graphs of object state (S-Graph) and object spatial
relationships (R-Graph).

A.3.3 EXAMPLE OF SCENE GRAPH PROCESSING

Figure 6 illustrates how an action scene graph is constructed and decomposed for the effect frame
of Pouring Water on Coffee Ground within the task of Making Coffee.

Input Prompt:                                     GPT-4o Output:
You should Identify spatial relationship          Spatial Relation:
and Capture key visual attributes for
specified objects and relevant objects.           {“ground” -> “in” -> “filter”,
                                                  “kettle” -> “above” -> “ground”}
Effect Frame:                                     Visual Attribute:
                                                  {“ground” -> [“saturated”, “foamy”],
Objects: Coffee Ground, Kettle                    “kettle”->[“black”],“[“filter”]->[white]”}

        Action Scene Graph                        Object State Sub-graph

Black                  Saturated Foamy            Black   Saturated Foamy

Kettle         Above     Coffee                   Kettle         Coffee
                         Ground                                  Ground

White          Filter    In                       Object Relation Sub-graph

                                                  Kettle  Above  Coffee
                                                                 Ground
       Object  Relation          Attribute

Figure 6: An example showing the construction and decomposition of action scene graph.

A.4 SOLUTION TO FAILED KNOWLEDGE EXTRACTION

During effect-frame preprocessing for multimodal feature extraction, several failure cases were ob-
served. Grounding DINO may miss relevant objects or yield low-confidence detections, while GPT-
4o may fail to recognize the image, leading to missing object states or spatial relations. To address
these issues, we introduce an Effect Mask. The mask is assigned a value of 1 only when both
Grounding DINO and GPT-4o successfully process the effect frame; otherwise, it is set to 0. During
feature alignment, only instances with a mask value of 1 contribute to loss computation and are
used to generate enhanced segment features for mistake detection. For masked-out instances, effect
modeling is bypassed, and segment features from the segmentation backbone are directly fed into
the mistake detector.

                                              15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Algorithm 1 Action Scene Graph Construction

Input: Relation Dict, Attribute Dict
Output: Nodes, Edges

     // Initialization.
 1: Nodes ← dict(”Object”:[], ”Attribute”:[], ”Relation”:[])
 2: Edges ← list([])

     // Add object-relation edges.

3: for each (objA, rel, objB) in Relation Dict do

4: if objA ∈/ Nodes[”Object”] then

5:   Append objA to Nodes[”Object”]

6: end if

7: if objB ∈/ Nodes[”Object”] then

8:   Append objB to Nodes[”Object”]

9: end if

10: if rel ∈/ Nodes[”Relation”] then

11:  Append rel to Nodes[”Relation”]

12: end if

13: Append (objA, rel), (rel, objB) to Edges

14: end for

     // Add object-attribute edges

15: for each (obj, attr) in Attribute Dict do

16: if obj ∈/ Nodes[”Object”] then

17:  Append obj to Nodes[”Object”]

18: end if

19: if attr ∈/ Nodes[”Attribute”] then

20:  Append attr to Nodes[”Attribute”]

21: end if

22: Append (obj, attr) to Edges

23: end for

24: return Nodes, Edges

Algorithm 2 Action Scene Graph Decomposition

Input: Extracted graph N odes, graph Edges, and key objects Objs = {obji}Ni=1
Output: State graph S-Graph, relation graph R-Graph

     // Initialization.

 1: Initialize S-Graph ← dict({“Nodes”:[], “Edges”:[]})
 2: Initialize R-Graph ← dict({“Nodes”:[], “Edges”:[]})

     // Construct the state graph from object-attribute edges

3: for each edge (a, b) in Edges do

4: if a ∈ Objs and b ∈ N odes[”Attribute”] then

5:   Append a and b to S-Graph[”N odes”]

6:   Append (a, b) to S-Graph[”Edges”]

7: end if

8: end for

     // Construct the state graph from object-attribute edges

9: for each edge (a, b) in Edges do

10: if a ∈ Objs and b ∈ N odes[”Relation”] then

11:  Append a and b to R-Graph[”N odes”]

12:  Append (a, b) to R-Graph[”Edges”]

13: end if

14: end for

15: return S-Graph, R-Graph

                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

For the following step in process of [goal], you should:

(1) predict relevant objects,

(F2o)r dtheescfroilbleowreisnugltsintegpsitnatpersoocfesresloefva[gnot aolb]j,eycotsuasfhtoerutlhde: action is complete. Use three concise
(1) spernetdeincct eres.leDvoanntootbujseecttsh,e verb in [step].

(2) describe resulting states of relevant objects after the action is complete. Use three concise
ExamsepnlteeAnc:es. Do not use the verb in [step].
[goal]: Make Kimchi Fried Rice [step]: add ham

OExbajemctpsl:e[hAa:m, fried rice, pan]
D[geosaclr]i:pMtioankse: Kimchi Fried Rice [step]: add ham
-ObTjehcetsd:i[cheadmh,afmrieids mricixe,edpawn]ith fried rice.
-DeTschreiphtiaomnsi:s on the pan.
- TThhee pdaicnecdohnataminiss hmaimxe. d with fried rice.

- The ham is on the pan.
E- xaTmhpelepaBn:contains ham.
[goal]: Make Pancakes [step]: pour egg

OExbajemctpsl:e[Beg:g, batter, bowl]
D[geosaclr]i:pMtioankse: Pancakes [step]: pour egg
-ObTjehcetse:g[gegigs,mbiaxtteedr,wbiothwtlh] e pancake batter.
-DeTschreipetgiogniss: in the mixing bowl.
- TThhee peagngciaskme ibxaetdtewr citohnthaienpsaengcga.ke batter.

- The egg is in the mixing bowl.
[-goaTlh]:e{ptanskc}ak[estbepat]t:e{rsctoepn}tains egg.

[goal]: {task} [step]: {step}

       (a) Prompt used to generate relevant objects and resulting outcome descriptions.

You are an expert in spatial reasoning and visual scene understanding. Given an image, your task is to:

1. Recognize all objects in the image.

2Y.oIdueanrteifayntheexpseprattinalsrpealatitaiol nresahsiponbientgwaenedn voibsjueacltsscinenteheunimdeargseta. nding. Given an image, your task is to:

31. CRaepctougrneikzeyalaltotrbibjeucttessionftohbejiemctasg. e.

42. GIdeennetrifaytethaestsrpuacttiuarlerdelsactieonnesghripapbhetwhaeteancocubrjeactetslyinretphreesimenatgset.he real-world state in the image.

3. Capture key attributes of objects.

I4m. pGoerntaenrattGe uaisdterluicnteusr:ed scene graph that accurately represents the real-world state in the image.

1. Describe spatial relations using clear spatial terms: ("above", "below", "on", "under", "to the left

oImf"p, o"trotatnhteGriugihdteloifn"e,s":next to", "in front of", "behind").

21. EDnessucreibeeascphaotibajlercetl'sataitotnrisbusteinsg(ec.lge.a, rshspaaptei,acl otelormr,sm: (a"taebrioavl)ea",re"bcealpotwur"e,d"oancc"u, "rautnedlye.r", "to the left

3o.f"O, n"ltyo dtheescrrigibhet wofh"a, t"ynoexutsteoe",in"itnhferoimntagoef";,d"obenhoitnidn"f)e.r beyond the visual evidence.

2. Ensure each object's attributes (e.g., shape, color, material) are captured accurately.

I3n.pOutnlFyodrmesactri(bIme awgheaat nydouTseexet)i:n the image; do not infer beyond the visual evidence.

Image: (Provided image)

TInepxut:t GFoernmeraatte(IamsacgeenaengdraTpehxft)o:r the objects in the image, focusing on their relationships and attributes.

Image: (Provided image)

OTuextpt:uGt Feonremraatte(aJSscOeNne-gRraeplahtifoonrsth+eAotbtrjiebcutsteisn+thSeeinmteangcee,sf)o:cusing on their relationships and attributes.

{

Ou"topbujteFctosr"m: [a"t<(oJbSjOecNt_-1R>e",la"t<ioonbsje+ctA_2tt>ri"b,u"t<eosb+jeScet_n3te>n"c,e.s..)]:,

{ "relation": [

   "o{b"jescutbsj"e:c[t""<: o"<bjoebcjte_c1t>_1",>""<, o"rbejleactti_o2n>":"", <"<reolbajteiocnt_>3">, ",o.b..j]e,ct": "<object_2>"},

   "re{l"astuiobnj"e:ct[": "<object_1>", "relation": "<relation>", "object": "<object_3>"},

      {{""ssuubbjjeecctt"":: ""<<oobbjjeecctt__21>>"",, ""rreellaattiioonn""::""<<rreellaattiioonn>>"",,""oobbjjeecctt""::""<<oobbjjeecctt__32>>""}},,

      .{.."subject": "<object_1>", "relation": "<relation>", "object": "<object_3>"},

   ], {"subject": "<object_2>", "relation": "<relation>", "object": "<object_3>"},

   "at.t.r.ibute": [

   ], {"subject": "<object_1>", "attribute": ["<attribute_1>", "<attribute_2>"]},

   "at{t"risbuubtjee"c:t"[: "<object_2>", "attribute": ["<attribute_1>", "<attribute_2>"]},

      .{.."subject": "<object_1>", "attribute": ["<attribute_1>", "<attribute_2>"]},

   ] {"subject": "<object_2>", "attribute": ["<attribute_1>", "<attribute_2>"]},

} ...

   ]                  (b) Prompt used to recognize object attributes and spatial relationships.

}

                               Figure 7: Prompts used in this work.

                                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

B EXPERIMENTS

B.1 IMPACT OF VLM ON PERFORMANCE
  Table 4: Performance by using different VLMs for action scene generation on EgoPER dataset.

Model       Quesadilla    Oatmeal   Pinwheel         Coffee       Tea                         All
            AUC EDA     AUC EDA    AUC EDA        AUC EDA    AUC EDA                     AUC EDA
Qwen3-VL
GPT-4o      77.8 69.0   77.3 68.8  70.0 62.2      70.2 64.3  71.4 68.7                   73.3 66.6
GPT-5       80.8 68.1   77.0 68.6  69.9 61.2      70.3 66.4  71.1 69.4                   73.8 66.7
            78.9 69.1   79.1 70.1  70.4 61.9      70.4 66.4  71.3 69.8                   74.0 67.5

At the time of completing the main paper, we employed the SOTA closed-source VLM GPT-4o
(Hurst et al., 2024) and the open-source VLM Qwen3-VL (Bai et al., 2025) to generate action scene
graphs. In this subsection of the Appendix, we extend Table 3f in the main paper by providing further
evaluation results of our proposed method using a more recent GPT-5 model (OpenAI, 2025). Table
4 shows that the GPT-5 variant achieves the best detection performance which exceeds both models,
suggesting that our method continues to benefit from ongoing advances in VLMs.

B.2 ACTION SEGMENTATION
       Table 5: Impact of predicted vs. ground-truth action segmentation on EgoPER dataset.

Action Seg  Quesadilla    Oatmeal   Pinwheel         Coffee       Tea                      Average
            AUC EDA     AUC EDA    AUC EDA        AUC EDA    AUC EDA                     AUC EDA
   Pred
    GT      80.8 68.1   77.0 68.6  69.9 61.2      70.3 66.4  71.1 69.4                   73.8 66.7
            92.8 78.4   94.2 75.0  80.7 72.0      80.8 71.3  84.8 76.7                   86.7 74.7

To assess the impact of action segmentation on mistake detection, we evaluated our method by re-
placing predicted segments with ground-truth segments during inference on the test set. As shown
in Table 5, using ground-truth segmentation yields a significant improvement in mistake detection
performance, which can be regarded as an upper bound for the current framework. This result sug-
gests that improvements in segmentation can consistently enhance detection performance; therefore,
future work will explore leveraging more advanced action segmentation models.

B.3 PROMPT TUNING IN MISTAKE DETECTOR
                 Table 6: Ablation results for the learnable prompts on EgoPER dataset.

Learnable   Quesadilla    Oatmeal   Pinwheel         Coffee       Tea        All
            AUC EDA     AUC EDA    AUC EDA        AUC EDA    AUC EDA    AUC EDA
     ✗
    ✓       77.4 68.9   76.6 57.5  69.5 60.7      68.5 67.0  72.1 63.6  72.8 63.5
            80.8 68.1   77.0 68.6  69.9 61.2      70.3 66.4  71.1 69.4  73.8 66.7

In the mistake detector, we adopt learnable prompts combined with prefix-tuning techniques (Li &
Liang, 2021) to capture action patterns. To evaluate the effectiveness of the prompt-based detec-
tor, we compare learnable prompts with fixed prompts. Both methods use the same template, “an
image showing [ACTION] for [TASK]”, to generate contextual embeddings. The fixed prompt
does not include learnable embeddings; instead, it directly uses the frozen text encoder of EVA-02
CLIP (Fang et al., 2024) to extract features. As shown in Table 6, the learnable prompt achieves
superior performance on most subtasks as well as on average compared to the fixed prompt. This
indicates that fixed textual descriptions, due to the lack of temporal and contextual motion encoding,
fail to align effectively with visual action features. Therefore, additional learnable embeddings are
necessary to capture the temporal dynamics of actions.

                                              18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

                       Figure 8: Web interface for scene recognition manual check.

For tasks where the performance of learnable prompts is slightly lower than that of fixed prompts,
such as Make Quesadilla, we observed that many erroneous actions and their corresponding mistakes
are less related to temporal dynamics. For example, Place tortilla on table (instead of on cutting
board) and Fold tortilla into a quarter-circle (instead of a half-circle) already encode sufficient
object-related information by using their textual labels. In such cases, our effect-aware model can
distinguish the errors effectively, and introducing additional learnable prompts to capture action
dynamics brings limited benefit and may even interfere with effect encoding, leading to performance
degradation. As this work provides an initial exploration of encoding action temporal dynamics in
mistake detection, extending it to a broader range of action labels is an interesting research direction.
B.4 EFFECT FRAME SCENE RECOGNITION
In this work, we employ GPT-4o (Hurst et al., 2024) to recognize the environments of effect frames,
which are then used to build scene graphs and extract symbolic knowledge. Recognition errors in
this process may introduce noise into the effect modeling. Although the main paper demonstrates
that effect modeling substantially improves mistake detection, we further conducted a quantitative
evaluation of GPT-4o’s recognition performance on complex scenes.
Specifically, we randomly sampled 20 recognition results from each sub-dataset of the EgoPER
dataset (Lee et al., 2024), yielding 100 scene instances in total. As shown in Figure 8, we developed
an HTML-based interface to display the recognized attributes and spatial relations for each effect
frame. Two graduate students from the computer science department, with no domain conflicts,
were recruited and randomly assigned 50 scenes each for manual evaluation. We define two met-
rics to assess recognition performance: Success Rate, the proportion of effect frames in which all
recognition results are correct, and Accuracy, the proportion of correctly recognized items among
all recognition results. The final scores were obtained by averaging the results of the two annotators.
Manual evaluation yielded a success rate of 48.4% and an accuracy of 87.0%. Although GPT-4o
occasionally produces recognition errors, its multi-perspective scene descriptions generally com-
plement one another, enabling reliable reconstruction of object states and spatial relationships. This
provides a solid foundation for effect modeling, and we anticipate that such limitations will diminish
as multimodal large language models continue to advance.

                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

C VISUALIZATIONS

C.1 ACTION SCENE GRAPH

Figure 9 demonstrates examples of action scene graph build upon GPT-4o recognition and parsed
by Algorithm 1. They captures attributes and spatial relationship of objects in a structured manner.

Action: Stir using spoon     Action: Spread jelly on nut butter      Action: Fold tortilla         Action: Weigh coffee beans

White                 Shiny         Creamy   Red                            Red   Soft      White  White     Round       Dark
                                             Jelly
                             Brown

Bowl        In  Spoon                Nut On                          Cutting On Tortilla           Bowl                      Coffee
                                    butter                           board                                           In       beans

                Held                                                 Above        Touch            In front              On
                 by                                                                 on                of
      Hand                          Next                                    Hand
                                     to
                                                                                                             Scale

                      Figure 9: Examples of action scene graphs built upon effect frames.

C.2 ACTION SEGMENT FRAME SCORING

Figure 10 shows examples of the top-3 video frames with the highest weighted scores in effect-
frame sampling. In our implementation, semantic and quality scores are averaged to produce the
final weights. Visual inspection indicates that these frames, which are often consecutive in the
video, contain highly similar content. Empirically, we find that using the top-K frames instead
of only the top-1 provides negligible performance gains while substantially increasing annotation
and training costs. When K is larger (e.g., K = 5), lower-scoring frames may introduce noisy or
mismatched content, leading to reduced mistake-detection performance. Therefore, we select only
the highest-scoring frame as the effect frame in our sampling strategy.

                                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Action: Check water temperature               Action: Fold paper filter to create semi-circle  Action: Pour a small amount of water on grounds

                              Semantic 0.99                                   Semantic 0.94                                    Semantic 0.92
                                Quality 0.78                                   Quality 0.78                                     Quality 0.99
                              Weighted 0.89                                  Weighted 0.86                                     Weighted 0.96

                              Semantic 0.93                                   Semantic 0.99                                    Semantic 0.88
                                Quality 0.85                                   Quality 0.34                                     Quality 0.99
                              Weighted 0.89                                  Weighted 0.67                                     Weighted 0.94

                              Semantic 0.94                                   Semantic 0.71                                    Semantic 0.89
                                Quality 0.51                                   Quality 0.52                                     Quality 0.97
                              Weighted 0.73                                  Weighted 0.62                                     Weighted 0.93

Action: Stir using spoon                      Action: Put banana                               Action: Drizzle honey in bowl

                               Semantic 0.99                             Semantic 0.93                                         Semantic 0.96
                                Quality 0.91                              Quality 0.74                                          Quality 0.99
                              Weighted 0.95                              Weighted 0.84                                        Weighted 0.98

                               Semantic 0.93                             Semantic 0.85                                         Semantic 0.98
                                Quality 0.89                              Quality 0.65                                          Quality 0.78
                              Weighted 0.91                              Weighted 0.75                                        Weighted 0.88

                               Semantic 0.95                             Semantic 0.93                                         Semantic 0.99
                                Quality 0.49                              Quality 0.40                                          Quality 0.58
                              Weighted 0.72                              Weighted 0.67                                        Weighted 0.79

Action: Spread butter onto tortilla           Action: Slice using floss                        Action: Roll tortilla

Semantic 0.78                                                            Semantic 0.99                                Semantic 0.93
 Quality 0.99                                                             Quality 0.59                                 Quality 0.77
Weighted 0.89                                                            Weighted 0.79                                Weighted 0.85

Semantic 0.99                                                            Semantic 0.85                                Semantic 0.95
 Quality 0.71                                                             Quality 0.59                                 Quality 0.61
Weighted 0.67                                                            Weighted 0.72                                Weighted 0.78

Semantic 0.79                                                            Semantic 0.75                                Semantic 0.99
 Quality 0.53                                                             Quality 0.68                                 Quality 0.15
Weighted 0.66                                                            Weighted 0.72                                Weighted 0.57

Action: Use knife to scoop Nutella            Action: Measure 12 ounces of cold water          Action: Steep tea bag in mug

                               Semantic 0.90                                Semantic 0.99                                     Semantic 0.99
                                Quality 0.66                                  Quality 0.99                                      Quality 0.68
                              Weighted 0.78                                 Weighted 0.99                                     Weighted 0.84

                               Semantic 0.79                                 Semantic 0.98                                    Semantic 0.71
                                Quality 0.75                                  Quality 0.84                                      Quality 0.85
                              Weighted 0.77                                 Weighted 0.91                                     Weighted 0.78

                               Semantic 0.99                                 Semantic 0.87                                    Semantic 0.73
                                Quality 0.27                                  Quality 0.94                                      Quality 0.77
                               Weighted 0.63                                Weighted 0.91                                     Weighted 0.75

Figure 10: Examples of scores by effect frame sampling for different actions.

                                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

D FURTHER DISCUSSION

Dependence on object detection and scene graphs. The performance of our framework remains
tied to the accuracy of object detection and scene graph generation. In egocentric and cluttered envi-
ronments, objects are frequently occluded, blurred, or partially visible, leading to unstable detection
and relationship modeling, which in turn degrades the reliability of error detection. Future directions
include incorporating stronger spatiotemporal representations, such as 3D or 4D modeling, together
with multimodal cues, such as depth maps or point clouds, to improve robustness under occlusion
and enhance object localization and relational reasoning.

Spatial-temporal modeling. Current effect modeling focuses on single-step actions and does not
explicitly capture long-range dependencies across multiple steps. In real procedural tasks, small
early deviations can accumulate and lead to significant downstream errors. Future directions include
modeling cross-step dependencies through hierarchical task graphs, causal reasoning structures, or
program-level state transition models, thereby extending the framework to long-horizon, multi-step
reasoning and enabling more comprehensive detection of complex procedural errors.

Supervision of effect modeling. Our framework currently relies on multimodal supervision gen-
erated by large pretrained models, which may hinder generalization to new domains or resource-
constrained settings. To reduce this dependency, future work may explore weakly supervised or
self-supervised signals, for example, leveraging temporal consistency, action outcome comparisons,
or environment state transitions to automatically construct supervision, thereby improving scalabil-
ity in broader domains and scenarios.

Dependence on large models. Our method relies on large models to generate pseudo-labels or
auxiliary signals for action effect modeling, yet their outputs can be stochastic and inconsistent.
For instance, in experiments, we observed that an identical effect frame may yield slightly different
spatial relationship descriptions across runs, and such noise can propagate into learned effect repre-
sentations and impact training stability. Potential mitigation strategies include adopting open-source
models with reproducible checkpoints and fixed random seeds, as well as introducing consistency
constraints, cross-model voting, or automatic filtering mechanisms to reduce noise propagation.

Interpretability of mistakes. Most existing methods, including ours, formulate error detection as
binary classification, which provides limited insight into the underlying causes of errors. Enhancing
interpretability therefore represents an important research direction. One possible solution is to inte-
grate LLMs or LVLMs to generate human-understandable explanations, improving the transparency
and usability of error detection systems.

Potential of world models. World models have recently emerged as an active research direction,
as they capture environment dynamics and predict future scenes based on historical observations.
These capabilities make them promising for procedural video mistake detection, particularly for
online and one-class classification (OCC) settings. Future directions include predicting future states
in pixel or latent space conditioned on past observations and comparing them with actual outcomes
to identify inconsistencies, which correspond to procedural errors.

E USE OF LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL

In this work, large language models (LLMs) were employed solely for English translation and lan-
guage polishing, with the goal of improving fluency and clarity of the manuscript so that the con-
tributions can be presented to readers more effectively. LLMs were not used for idea generation,
conceptualization, or any other aspect of the research.

                                                          22
