arXiv:2111.12454v1 [cs.AI] 24 Nov 2021  Exploring Business Process Deviance with Sequential
                                                          and Declarative Patterns

                                        Giacomo Bergamia, Chiara Di Francescomarinob, Chiara Ghidinib, Fabrizio
                                                                      Maria Maggic, Joonas Puurad

                                                          aNewcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom
                                                                         bFondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy
                                                                         cFree University of Bozen-Bolzano, Italy
                                                                                 dUniversity of Tartu, Estonia

                                        Abstract

                                        Business process deviance refers to the phenomenon whereby a subset of the
                                        executions of a business process deviate, in a negative or positive way, with
                                        respect to their expected or desirable outcomes. Deviant executions of a business
                                        process include those that violate compliance rules, or executions that undershoot
                                        or exceed performance targets. Deviance mining is concerned with uncovering
                                        the reasons for deviant executions by analyzing event logs stored by the systems
                                        supporting the execution of a business process. In this paper, the problem of
                                        explaining deviations in business processes is ﬁrst investigated by using features
                                        based on sequential and declarative patterns, and a combination of them. Then,
                                        the explanations are further improved by leveraging the data attributes of events
                                        and traces in event logs through features based on pure data attribute values
                                        and data-aware declarative rules. The explanations characterizing the deviances
                                        are then extracted by direct and indirect methods for rule induction. Using
                                        real-life logs from multiple domains, a range of feature types and diﬀerent forms
                                        of decision rules are evaluated in terms of their ability to accurately discriminate
                                        between non-deviant and deviant executions of a process as well as in terms of
                                        understandability of the ﬁnal outcome returned to the users.
                                        Keywords: Process Mining, Deviance Mining, Sequential Patterns, Declarative
                                        Patterns

                                        Preprint submitted to Decision Support Systems  November 25, 2021
1. Introduction

    The increasing adoption of ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) and man-
agement applications able to track information about process executions in the
so called execution traces, has opened up the possibility of extracting knowledge
from traces, collected in event logs. Diﬀerent techniques have been developed
in the context of process mining to discover models from event logs, to check
conformance between an event log and a process model, or to enhance existing
process models starting from event logs [1, 2, 3]. Among the diﬀerent types of
knowledge that can be extracted from event logs, a crucial role is played by the
explanation of deviant traces, i.e., business process executions that deviate in
a positive or negative way from the expected outcome [4]. Indeed, discovering
why some executions take more (less) time than others, or what characterizes
the traces that end up with a faulty (or particularly good) outcome could be
very useful for business analysts in order to understand what can be improved
to reduce negative deviances and spread the positive ones.

    Business process deviance mining is a branch of process mining which aims
at analyzing event logs in order to discover and characterize business process
deviances. The input of deviance mining approaches is an event log, in which
each trace is labeled as deviant or non-deviant. The purpose is to discover a
descriptive and informative model distinguishing the “good” traces from the
deviant ones. A good characterization of deviant executions gives analysts hints
concerning the causes generating deviance within trace executions, thus allowing
eﬀective process improvement solutions.

    As the former formulation easily boils down to a binary classiﬁcation problem,
we show how business process deviance mining can be solved following this
intuition. Relevant patterns and/or data attributes describing execution traces
are used as features for encoding labeled traces. The labeled encoded traces are
then used for training a classiﬁer that is in charge of discriminating between
deviant and non-deviant executions based on those patterns. The most obvious
choice to describe execution traces [5], which are sequences of activities, is

                                                   2
resorting to sequential patterns representing sequences of adjacent activities.
However, other types of features can be used to describe a process trace, as for
instance declarative patterns [6], i.e., patterns related to the validity of predeﬁned
temporal properties of activities in the trace, or combinations of sequential and
declarative patterns (hybrid encoding). In addition to features extracted from
the control-ﬂow perspective (expressing properties of the sequence of activities
in a trace), it is also possible to extract additional features by making use of
data attributes attached to traces and events in an event log, which can help in
characterizing diﬀerences between deviant and non-deviant executions.

    This paper frames the problem of investigating the impact that diﬀerent
types of control-ﬂow features (sequential and declarative patterns, and their
combinations) have on business process deviance mining results. Then, it provides
two diﬀerent ways of using data features in addition to control-ﬂow features to
characterize business process deviance. These features are evaluated in terms
of their ability to accurately discriminate between non-deviant and deviant
executions of a process using real-life event logs from multiple domains. Finally,
the paper analyzes the possible outcomes returned to the users. Two diﬀerent
methods returning decision rules are compared both in terms of their classiﬁcation
performance and in terms of amount and length of the decision rules returned
(to investigate user readability and explanation conciseness). More concretely,
the two methods leverage, respectively, decision trees (and a procedure for the
extraction of decision rules from them), and the Ripper-k algorithm, which
inherently provides decision rules as outcome. The comparison is conducted to
investigate the trade-oﬀ between the accuracy of the deviance mining approach
and the complexity of the decision rules returned.

    The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 gives an overview of previous
research related to this paper. Section 3 introduces the necessary background
knowledge to understand the concepts and techniques used. In Section 4,
a problem statement for business process deviance mining and a motivating
example are given. Section 5 introduces the pipeline used for business process
deviance mining and how sequential and declarative control-ﬂow patterns as

                                                   3
well as data attributes can be used as features to support deviance mining. This
section also shows how to provide explanations for business process deviance in
the form of decision rules. Section 6 gives an overview on how the evaluation was
carried out and reports the results. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper by
giving an overview of the work done and spells out directions for future work.

2. Related Work

    The main works related to business process deviance mining can be classiﬁed
into two main families: the ones using delta-analysis that are mainly based on
the identiﬁcation of diﬀerences between the models discovered from deviant and
non-deviant traces (e.g., [7, 8]), and those based on classiﬁcation techniques [9,
10, 11, 5, 12, 13]. This work falls in the latter group. The works in this second
group leverage classiﬁcation techniques to discriminate between normal and
deviant traces. These approaches usually discover patterns that are then used
to build a classiﬁer. They can be further classiﬁed based on the type of features
used for training the classiﬁer.

    In [9, 10], the authors use the frequency of individual activities in order to
train classiﬁers in a ﬁnancial and a clinical scenario, respectively. Bose and
van der Aalst in [11, 5] employ sequential pattern mining to discover sequential
patterns as tandem repeats, maximal repeats and alphabet repeats to be used as
features for training a classiﬁer. Similarly, in [14], association rules are used to
discover co-occurrence patterns in the context of deviant classes in a healthcare
scenario. In [12, 13], discriminative mining is used to discover discriminative
patterns, i.e., patterns that, although not necessarily very frequent, clearly
discriminate between deviant and non-deviant traces. A benchmark collecting
all these works and evaluating and comparing them in terms of diﬀerent feature
types and classiﬁers is presented in [15, 16].

    Diﬀerent types of patterns have also been combined together in [17, 18,
19, 20]. In particular, in [17], in order to avoid the redundant representation
deriving from mixing diﬀerent families of patterns, the authors propose an

                                                   4
ensemble learning approach in which multiple learners are trained encoding
the log according to diﬀerent types of patterns. In [18], data attributes have
also been taken into account in the discovery phase as well as for training the
classiﬁer. Finally, in [19, 20], the authors enhance their previous work [17] by
proposing an alternative multi-learning approach probabilistically combining
various classiﬁcation methods.

    The extraction of data-aware Declare constraints from event logs has been
previously discussed in [21, 22]. In that work, the focus is on the unsupervised
discovery of data-aware Declare models. Our work is also related to papers
that present approaches for the supervised discovery of declarative models from
positive and negative traces like [23, 24, 25]. Recently, declarative patterns
have been used to characterize diﬀerent process variants like in the approaches
presented in [26, 27].

    Diﬀerently from the related work described above, this paper:
    • takes into account a completely diﬀerent and unexplored hybrid encoding

       to support deviance mining;
    • combines the family of declarative patterns with sequential patterns by

       facing the feature redundancy problem with feature selection approaches;
    • evaluates the use of data features in combination with control-ﬂow features

       and provides two diﬀerent methods for data feature extraction from event
       logs;
    • compares and evaluates two methods for extracting explanations for busi-
       ness process deviance in the form of decision rules.

3. Background

    This section gives the background information needed to understand the
content of the paper.

3.1. Business Processes and Logs
    As the work in this paper concentrates on business process event logs, we give

here an overview of what a business process is and how its data representation

                                                   5
looks like.

3.1.1. Business Process
    A business process is a set of activities, which are performed in order to

achieve a particular goal in a business operation.
    Some common types of business processes include:

    • Application-to-approval, where a sequence of activities are executed after
       the arrival of an application with the end goal of approving or rejecting it.
       Examples of this type of processes are the application process of students
       in universities or the hiring process of employees in companies. Typical
       activities here are “call the referees” or “score the application”;

    • Order-to-cash, which begins with a customer asking for purchasing a
       product (or using a service) and ends with the product being delivered and
       the payment for the product being received by the seller. Typical activities
       here include “check the inventory for stock” or “estimate the price quote
       for the customer”.

    While business processes are executed, it is possible to track and store the
process execution information for analysis by turning activities and events into
execution traces, which are then collected in the form of event logs.

3.1.2. Event log
    The standard for storage and manipulation of event logs is XES (eXtensible

Event Stream) [28], which is an XML-based format specialized for the storage of
event log data. The basic hierarchy of a XES document contains a single log
object. The log object can contain any number of trace objects. Each trace can
contain any number of event objects.

    All event information related to a speciﬁc process is contained within a log.
Some examples of processes could be:

    • A medical assessment process;
    • A hiring process of employees.

                                                   6
    A trace describes a time-ordered execution of a speciﬁc process. Given the
above processes, the corresponding traces could be:

    • The speciﬁc assessment of a patient;
    • The speciﬁc hiring of an employee in a company.

    An event represents an observed activity at atomic-level. Possible events in
the traces given above could be respectively:

    • The addition of blood test results to the patient’s health record;
    • The decision of hiring by a human resource specialist.

Attributes.. Log, trace and event objects deﬁne the structure of a XES document.
The relevant information is stored in attributes describing either the whole log,
or a single trace, or a speciﬁc event within a trace. According to the standard,
there are 6 elementary attribute types: String, Date, Int, Float, Boolean, ID.
Additionally, the standard describes two collection type attributes: List and
Container. In particular, a trace has always at least an attribute of type String
with key concept:name, which describes the trace ID. Each event has always at
least an attribute concept:name representing the name of the activity executed,
an attribute time:timestamp indicating the time when the event occurred, and
an attribute lifecycle:transition, which represents the transactional state of
the activity (e.g., start indicating that the activity has started, or complete
representing the completion of the activity). Traces might also have a speciﬁc
attribute attribute (label ) specifying whether the trace is considered to be deviant
or not. Other attributes can be attached to events such as org:group describing
which group/resource executed the activity. These additional attributes are
generically referred to as event payload.

3.2. Log patterns
    We give now an overview of the relevant pattern types, which can be used to

describe log traces.

                                                   7
3.2.1. Sequential Patterns
    Sequential patterns [5] represent one of the pattern types that can be used to

describe traces. Sequential patterns are sequences of events that occur frequently
in a trace, thus capturing particular control-ﬂow relations in it. Among the main
types of sequential patterns, we can ﬁnd:

     • Tandem Repeats (TR): this type of pattern denotes sequences of events that are
        repeated consecutively within a trace; these sequences correspond to process
        loops.

     • Maximal Repeats (MR): this type of pattern denotes maximal sequences of events
        that are repeated in an event log; these sequences correspond to sub-processes.

     • Tandem Repeats Alphabet (TRA): this type of pattern denotes tandem repeats
        that share the same activities (i.e., the alphabet of unique activities); these
        sequences correspond to variations of TR taking into account process parallelism.

     • Maximal Repeats Alphabet (MRA): this type of pattern denotes maximal repeats
        that share the same activities (i.e., the alphabet of unique activities); these
        sequences correspond to variations of MR taking into account process parallelism.

    For instance, given a trace T = a, b, c, a, b, c, d, a, b , the set of TR is {abc},
as abc is the only pattern repeated twice consecutively. For TRA, the ordering
of activities within the pattern does not matter, but the patterns have to appear
consecutively. In this case, given a trace T = a, b, c, c, b, a, a, b, c , the set of
TRA is {abc, cb, ab, c, a}, with abc being repeated 3 times, ab and cb twice and
a and c also twice (without a speciﬁc order of events within the pattern). A
pattern is considered to be a maximal repeat, if it cannot be extended to left
or to right for a longer repeat covering all the occurrences of the pattern. For
example, considering trace T = a, b, c, a, b, c, d, a, b , the set of MR is {ab, abc}
(c and bc are not maximal, because both occurrences can be extended to the left
to be abc, which includes all c and bc in the trace). Pattern ab is a maximal
repeat, because extending it would not cover the last occurrence of ab. For
MRA, the ordering of activities within the pattern does not matter. For trace
T = b, a, c, a, b, c, d, b, a , the set of MRA is {ab, abc}. Pattern abc occurs twice
and is therefore a repeat. Pattern ab is repeated three times and is maximal,

                                                   8
because it cannot be extended in a way that it covers all the occurrences of ab.
Patterns c, b are not maximal, because all c also occur in abc, and all b occur in
ab, which are both maximal patterns.

3.2.2. Declare
    Declare is a declarative process modeling language ﬁrst introduced in [6]. The

declarative approach for business process modeling was introduced to be able to
model loosely-structured processes [29] working in contexts with high variability.
As shown in [30], this type of processes are indeed diﬃcult to be deﬁned with the
rigid speciﬁcations of imperative approaches, which tell users what to do step
by step. They can instead easily be designed using declarative process models
that shift the decision making from the workﬂow system supporting the process
execution to the user. The basic building block of a Declare model is a constraint,
which is a template (i.e., an abstract parameterized property) instantiated on a
set of real activities.

    Linear Temporal Logic (ltl) over ﬁnite traces is used for specifying the
formal semantics of Declare templates [31]. In addition, Declare templates
have a graphical notation, which makes them easy to use and interpret for
process analysts. Table 1 gives an overview of the most commonly used Declare
templates, their graphical representations, and a textual description for each of
them. The parameters of a template are speciﬁed in capital letters, whereas real
activities of constraints are speciﬁed in lower-case letters (e.g., Response(a,b)
is an instantiation of template Response with activities a and b).

    Declare templates can be grouped into three main categories: existence
templates (ﬁrst 4 rows of Table 1), which involve only one event; (mutual)
relation templates (rows from 5 to 15), which describe a dependency between two
events; and negative relation templates (last 3 rows), which describe a negative
dependency between two events. To give some examples of Declare constraints,
consider the following four traces:

   1. a, a, b, c ;
   2. b, b, c, d ;

                                                   9
Template                     Explanation                                      Notation
Existence templates
Existence(n, A)              A occurs at least n times                             n..∗
Absence(m + 1, A)            A occurs at most m times                                A
Init(A)                      A is the ﬁrst to occur
End(A)                       A is the last to occur                                0..m
                                                                                     A

                                                                                    Init
                                                                                     A

                                                                                    End
                                                                                     A

Relation templates

RespondedExistence(A, B)     If A occurs, then B occurs                    A              B
Response(A, B)               If A occurs, then B occurs after A
AlternateResponse(A, B)      Each time A occurs, then B occurs after-      A              B
                             wards, before A recurs
ChainResponse(A, B)          Each time A occurs, then B occurs imme-       A              B
                             diately after
Precedence(A, B)             B occurs only if preceded by A                A              B
AlternatePrecedence(A, B)    Each time B occurs, it is preceded by A
                             and no other B can recur in between           A              B
ChainPrecedence(A, B)        Each time B occurs, then A occurs imme-
                             diately before                                A              B

                                                                           A              B

Mutual relation templates

CoExistence(A, B)            If B occurs, then A occurs, and vice versa    A              B
Succession(A, B)             A occurs if and only if B occurs after A
AlternateSuccession(A, B)    A and B occur if and only if the latter fol-  A              B
                             lows the former, and they alternate each
ChainSuccession(A, B)        other                                         A              B
                             A and B occur if and only if the latter
                             immediately follows the former                A              B

Negative relation templates

NotCoExistence(A, B)         A and B never occur together                  A              B
NotSuccession(A, B)          A never occurs before B
NotChainSuccession(A, B)     A and B occur if and only if the latter does  A              B
                             not immediately follow the former
                                                                           A              B

                             Table 1. Declare templates

                             10
   3. a, b, c, b ;
   4. a, b, a, c .

    Constraint Init(a) (meaning that a trace has to start with the execution of
a) is satisﬁed in traces 1, 3 and 4, but not satisﬁed in trace 2, since this trace
does not start with a. On the other hand, Response(a, b) (meaning that if
a occurs, then b must eventually follow) is satisﬁed in traces 1, 2 and 3, but
not satisﬁed in trace 4, since, here, the second occurrence of a is not eventually
followed by b.

    An activation of a constraint in a trace is an event whose occurrence imposes
obligations on another event (the target) in the context of same trace [32, 33]. For
example, for constraint Response(a,b) a is an activation, because the execution
of a imposes an obligation on b, forcing it to be eventually executed. Event b
is a target. Referring back to the sample traces above, in traces 1, 3 and 4, a
occurs and constraint Response(a,b) is activated. Trace 2 does not include a
and, therefore, the constraint is not activated in that trace. In such a case, the
constraint is vacuously satisﬁed [34] in the trace.

    An activation of a constraint in a trace is either a fulﬁllment or a violation
for the constraint in the trace. If every activation of a constraint in a trace
leads to a fulﬁllment, then the constraint is satisﬁed in the trace. Constraint
Response(a,b) is activated in traces 1, 3 and 4. In trace 1, it is activated twice
and both occurrences of a are eventually followed by b, therefore both activations
are fulﬁllments. In trace 3, the constraint is activated and fulﬁlled once. In trace
4, the constraint is activated twice, but the second activation a is not eventually
followed by b and leads to a violation. A constraint is violated in a trace if at
least one activation of the constraint leads to a violation in the trace.

3.2.3. Data-Aware Declare Constraints
    While Declare in its original form is mainly used to set constraints on

control-ﬂow aspects of a process, data-aware Declare constraints extend Declare
constraints so as to include conditions on data payloads of events [35]. A data
payload of an event is a list of pairs attribute-value including the event attributes

                                                  11
(which can have diﬀerent values for diﬀerent events in the same trace) and
the trace attributes (having the same value for all events in the same trace)
In particular, a data-aware Declare constraint is activated if its (control-ﬂow
based) activation occurs and an additional condition on its data payload holds.
Consider, for example, the following traces:

    1. a{g = 1}, a{g = 2}, b, c ;
    2. b, b, c, d ;
    3. a{g = 2}, b, c, b ;
    4. a{g = 2}, b, a{g = 1}, c .

    In these traces, a{g = 1} means that a has an attribute g having value 1 in
its payload. Consider the data-aware constraint Response(a,b,{g=1}). This
constraint requires the occurrence of a with attribute g = 1 to be activated. In
trace 1, the ﬁrst a is an activation, but the second one is not, since the data
condition does not hold on its payload. The only activation in this trace leads to
a fulﬁllment (since it is eventually followed by b) and the constraint is satisﬁed
in that trace. Trace 2 does not have any activations and is, therefore, vacuously
satisﬁed. In trace 3, there are no activations either since a occurs only once, but
the data condition does not hold on its payload. In trace 4, the constraint is
activated once (second occurrence of a) and this leads to a violation since the
occurrence of the activation is not followed by the occurrence of a target b.

4. Problem

    This section provides an example motivating the importance of approaches
for business process deviance mining. Later, we will show the advantages of
exploring diﬀerent types of patterns to explain deviances based on this example
(see Section 5.6). The example pertains to the customer support process carried
out by a company providing a service, shown in the form of a BPMN model in
Figure 1. The support process aims at helping customers whenever a problem
occurs or when new features are required. The process starts when the customer

                                                   12
support oﬃce receives a request from a client. The customer support oﬃce
registers the request and performs a ﬁrst evaluation. If the request can be easily
solved, it is solved and the customer is notiﬁed. In case the request is diﬃcult
to solve, a more in-depth evaluation is carried out, a solution is found and the
customer is notiﬁed. Then the customer is asked to give feedback on the proposed
solution. If the customer is not happy with the solution, the issue is evaluated
again, an alternative solution is found and the customer is notiﬁed again until a
suitable solution is found. In both cases (simple and complex requests), if the
problem was never encountered before, a report has to be prepared documenting
the request and the solution provided before the request can be closed.

                                       Figure 1. Customer support example

                                             Figure 2. High-level pipeline

    The company’s business process analysts have noticed that some of the
executions of the customer support process take longer than others, i.e., these
executions deviate with respect to the expected process execution time. Analysts
are, therefore, interested in understanding what these deviant traces are, how to
characterize them and the reasons why they take more time. This information,
is indeed crucial for them to be able to improve the process and avoid the
occurrence of these delayed executions in the future.

                                                  13
5. Business Process Deviance Mining Pipeline

    Given a labeled log, as ﬁrst step of the pipeline, we carry out feature discov-
ery (Section 5.1) by exploiting sequential pattern discovery, Declare discovery
methods, and by using a combination of the two; in addition to control-ﬂow
feature, in some cases, also features extracted from event payloads is used. Due
to the large number of features that can be discovered, the next step is to
perform feature selection (Section 5.2) by extracting a subset of features that
are used to encode the traces. Then, trace encoding (§5.3) provides a feature
vector embedding for each trace; to each vector we associate a label indicating
whether the corresponding trace is deviant or not with respect to a certain
criterion. Then, in the model training phase, we exploit classiﬁcation models for
establishing a correlation between the dimensions of the feature vector and the
labels. In addition to that, such models will act as explainer substantiating the
diﬀerence between deviant traces and non-deviant traces.

5.1. Feature Discovery
    Feature discovery is the process of extracting the relevant characteristics to

all the traces within the log: those could be described as sequential patterns,
declarative rules, or speciﬁc payload values. These features will be later on
represented as one dimension of a vector that will provide the trace representation.
Such a vector, alongside with the label of the associated trace, will be the only
input for the model training task.

Data Features. Concerning pure data features extracted from the event payloads,
we adopt the attribute-value data representation. Such a representation is widely
adopted in data mining, machine learning, neural networks, and statistics due
to its simplicity. For each attribute X in the payload, we extract a set of values
v ∈ VX associated to X, so to generate a new data feature using these values.
Data features can be of type String, Int, Float and Boolean.

    As attributes X within a single trace might be associated with diﬀerent
values in diﬀerent events, we ﬁrst decided to prioritize either the ﬁrst occurrence

                                                   14
of X (Choose ﬁrst, denoted as first(X) = v) or its last occurrence (Choose last,
denoted as last(X) = v). E.g., consider trace a{g = 1}, a{g = 2}, b{g = 3}, c .
For attribute g, Choose ﬁrst and Choose last produce features first(g) = 1
and last(g) = 3.

    As an alternative strategy, we also decided to compute aggregation functions
f over a multiset1 of values (VX , µ) for each given X; we restricted the class
of aggregation functions to the following, thus producing a feature denoted as
f(X) = u, where u is the result of the aggregation function.

    • Value v Count (count(X, v) = µ(v)) - For each value v ∈ VX associated
       to an attribute X, we count how many times (µ(v)) the attribute assumes
       that value in the trace (used for attributes of type String);

    • Choose max (max(X) = max VX ) - The value of the feature is the
       maximum value of the attribute in the trace (used for attributes of type
       Int and Float);

    • Choose min (min(X) = min VX ) - The value of the feature is the min-
       imum value of the attribute in the trace (used for attributes of type Int
       and Float);

    • Compute avg (avg(X) = avg VX ) - The value of the feature is the
       average of the values the attribute assumes in the trace (used for attributes
       of type Int and Float).

E.g., given a trace a{g = 1}, a{g = 2}, b{g = 3}, c , Choose max, Choose min
and Compute avg produce features max(g) = 3, min(g) = 1 and avg(g) = 2,
respectively. Also, given a trace a{color = white}, a{color = black}, b{color =
white}, c , attribute color assumes two diﬀerent values: white and black. There-
fore, Count produces two features. The ﬁrst feature is count(color, white) = 2
and the second one is count(color, black) = 1. Finally, we also extract meta-
information of a trace, such as the trace length (the number of events within the

    1A multiset is a pair (A, µ), where A is a set of values and µ : A → N denotes the number
of occurrences µ(a) of each a ∈ A.

                                                  15
trace) and the trace time length (time diﬀerence in milliseconds between the last
and the ﬁrst event of the trace). All these feature extraction techniques were
exploited for our experiments.

Sequential Features. We discover sequential patterns as in [5] to extract discrim-
inative TR, TRA, MR and MRA patterns. This algorithm discovers patterns
that are frequent either in deviant traces or in non-deviant traces but not in
both, so to identify features that uniquely describe each class of traces. Frequent
patterns are selected by ﬁltering out the ones having a support inferior to a
given minimum support threshold ϑ. In our experiments, the support informa-
tion associated to each sequential feature is also preserved and passed as an
additional information for the trace encoding phase. Finally, for each feature X
and trace σ within the log L, the discovery algorithm returns a matrix M where
MX,σ denotes the relative support of X within trace σ: we preserve also this
information in the trace encoding step.

Declarative Features. We discover the instantiation of declarative templates via
the well-known Apriori algorithm [36]. Generally speaking, let Ak denote the set
of all frequent activity sets of size k ∈ N and let Ck denote the set of all candidate
activity sets of size k that may potentially be frequent. The algorithm starts by
considering activity sets of size k = 1 and progresses iteratively by considering
activity sets of increasing sizes in each iteration. The set of candidate activity
sets of size k + 1, Ck+1, is generated by joining relevant frequent activity sets
from Ak. This set can be pruned eﬃciently using the property that a relevant
candidate activity set of size k + 1 cannot contain an infrequent subset. The
activity sets in Ck+1 that have a support above a given threshold ϑ constitute
the frequent activity sets of size k + 1 (Ak+1) used in the next iteration. We
discover activity sets that have a support above ϑ in either the sub-log of deviant
traces or in the sub-log of non-deviant traces.

    We instantiate the former algorithm over the Declare patterns as follows:
given the frequent activity set {a, b} where a and b are event labels, we in-
stantiate, e.g., the Response template as Response(a,b) and Response(b,a).

                                                  16
Limiting the instantiation of the candidate constraints to frequent activity sets
drastically reduces the number of candidate constraints to be checked. Finally,
each candidate constraint is checked separately over deviant and non-deviant
traces (depending on whether it is derived from an activity set discovered from
the sub-log of deviant traces or from the sub-log of non-deviant traces) to verify
if it is satisﬁed in a percentage of traces that is above the minimum support
threshold ϑ. The instantiated templates resulting from the process will constitute
the set of the declarative features.

Data-Aware Declarative Features. This last approach identiﬁes data-aware declar-
ative features, starting from the data-agnostic ones obtained as described in the
previous paragraph. Starting from each data-agnostic Declare feature, we use
the approach presented in [21, 22] to enrich it with a data condition as follows:

   1. Collect the fulﬁlled activations of the constraint in each trace;
   2. Extract the data payload of every fulﬁlled activation;
   3. Encode the payloads into feature vectors in which each attribute is a

       feature;
   4. Learn a decision tree by using the feature vectors labeled as deviant or non-

       deviant based on whether the corresponding payloads belong to activations
       occurring in deviant or non-deviant traces, respectively;
   5. Create a data-aware Declare constraint by considering the original Declare
       constraint enriched with a data condition discriminating deviant and non-
       deviant traces according to the model resulting from the trained decision
       tree. E.g., if the initial constraint is Response(a,b) and C is the data
       condition extracted from the decision tree, the new data-aware Declare
       constraint is Response(a,b,C).

5.2. Feature Selection
    The number of features generated from the previous step is, generally, too

large. Therefore, it becomes important to remove the features that do not
give much value for training the explanatory model. Having too many features

                                                  17
contributes indeed to long training times, overﬁtting and too complex classiﬁers.

The features discovered in the previous step are pruned via the coverage method,

described in [37]. In this method, a number of features is selected by ﬁrst ranking

them according to the Fisher score. The Fisher score for the j-th feature is

computed as:

                    i=1 c ni(µi − µ)2
              Fj =  c       2,         (1)
                    i=1 niσi

where ni denotes the number of data points in class i, µi and σ2i denote mean

and variance of class i corresponding to the j-th feature, and µ and σ are mean

and variance of all data point corresponding to the j-th feature. Then, following

the ranking, features are selected until every trace is covered by at least a ﬁxed

number of features (coverage threshold). A feature is only chosen if it covers

at least one of the traces not totally covered yet. Sequential and declarative

features can be ranked and selected separately, or, in the case of the hybrid

encoding, they are selected from a common ranking of sequential and declarative

features.

5.3. Trace Encoding
    In this step, each trace σ in the input log L is transformed into a vector vσ

with an associated classiﬁcation label yσ ∈ {0, 1}, i.e., deviant (1) or non-deviant
(0) trace, for training a classiﬁer. In particular, each feature X passing the
feature selection phase will correspond to one distinct dimension dX within the
ﬁnal vector representation vσ.

Sequential Encoding.. For each trace σ and given a sequential feature X, we set
the dimension dX of the vector vσ to Mσ,X , i.e., vσ[dX ] := MX,σ.

(Data-Aware) Declarative Encoding.. For each trace σ and given a declarative
feature X, we set the dimension dX of the vector vσ (i.e., vσ[dX ]) to:

    • -1, if the corresponding Declare constraint is violated in the trace;
    • 0, if the corresponding Declare constraint is vacuously satisﬁed in the trace;

                    18
    • n, if the corresponding Declare constraint is satisﬁed and activated n times
       in the trace.

E.g., given a trace a, b, c, a, b, c, d, a, b :
    • constraint Response(a,c) is violated, since the third activation leads to a
       violation and is encoded as -1;
    • constraint Response(a,b) is satisﬁed and activated 3 times and is encoded
       as 3;
    • constraint Response(e,b) is vacuously satisﬁed and is encoded as 0.

We also adopt the same approach for representing data-aware declarative features.
E.g., given a trace a{color = white}, c, b{color = black}, c, d, a{color = white}, c ,
we have:

    • constraint Response(a,c,color = white) is satisﬁed and activated twice,
       and is hence encoded as 2;

    • constraint Response(a,d,color = white) is violated, since the second
       occurrence of a is not eventually followed by d, and is encoded as -1;

    • constraint Response(b,c,color = white) is vacuously satisﬁed and encoded
       as 0 (b is not an activation, because the data condition color = white does
       not hold on its payload).

Hybrid Encoding. Each trace is encoded into a numerical feature vector as
explained in the previous two paragraphs depending on whether the feature is
sequential or declarative.

    In our experiments, all the encodings explained so far have been considered
with and without the data features introduced deﬁned and selected in the
previous steps of the pipeline.

5.4. Model Training
    For each type of encoding described, a classiﬁer is trained to both classify new

unseen traces (thus being able to evaluate the performance of the classiﬁcation)
and explain the classiﬁcation with explicit rules. For this reason, the chosen
classiﬁers are white-box classiﬁers.

                                                  19
5.5. Rule Extraction
    As output of a business process deviance mining approach, it is important

to provide a set of rules describing the diﬀerences between deviant and non-
deviant traces. To identify these rules, we use the white-box classiﬁers Ripperk
(Repeated Incremental Pruning to Produce Error Reduction) [38] and decision
trees [39]. Such models directly provide the classiﬁcation rules: while Ripper
directly provides the rules in output, they are reconstructed from a decision tree
by considering the conjunction of the atomic conditions encountered on each
path from the root of the tree to the leaves labeled as deviant (each path is a
separate rule). Conditions on the same feature are simpliﬁed by merging them
(when possible) and by removing subsumed conditions.

5.6. The Presented Pipeline in the Context of the Motivating Example
    Consider the motivating example presented in Section 4. By applying the

business process deviance mining pipeline with sequential features, analysts would
get as outcome that deviant traces are those for which the pattern ER, RCR, NC
is repeated more than twice (i.e., it is a tandem repeat with frequency greater
than 2). However, although many of the deviant traces seem to be captured by
this explanation, it could not be suﬃcient for characterizing all of them.

    The analysts can then try to apply the approach with declarative features.
The outcome, in this case, is that deviant traces are those for which activity
Resolve Simple Requests is eventually followed by Document Request (i.e., for
which Response(RSR, DR) is satisﬁed). Still, this explanation is not suﬃcient
for capturing all the deviant traces.

    By applying the approach with hybrid features, the analysts are ﬁnally able to
get an explanation using both sequential and declarative patterns, and covering
almost all traces, i.e., there are two situations in which the process executions
take longer:

    • when, in the case of complex requests, more than two iterations are carried
       out with the customer, until the customer is satisﬁed.

                                                   20
    • when customer support operators procrastinate writing reports related to
       simple request resolutions. Indeed, diﬀerently from complex requests, for
       which operators tend to complete the documentation immediately after the
       resolution, reports for simple requests tend to be delayed and the requests
       cannot be closed quickly.

    Since the control-ﬂow patterns are not able to completely discriminate deviant
from non-deviant traces, analysts could decide to add data features. Using these
additional features, they ﬁnd that a ﬁrst cause of deviance is the same as the
one they found without considering the data perspective, i.e., there is a deviance
when pattern ER, RCR, NC is repeated more than twice. However, with the
addition of pure data features, it would be possible to see that requests received
in July and August took more time to be processed. Also, by adding features
based on data-aware Declare constraints, analysts could ﬁnd explanations telling
that constraint Response(RSR,DR, resource = D) characterizes a deviant trace
better than the initial Declare constraint without the data condition. This means
that, if RSR was performed by a speciﬁc resource (D), the execution time was
longer.

    The addition of features based on data attributes help analysts to enrich and
reﬁne the deviance causes previously identiﬁed. In this case, analysts were able
to identify three situations where process executions take considerably longer:

    • when the request is received during the summer;
    • when a customer support operator (resource D) procrastinate writing

       reports related to simple request resolutions;
    • when, in the case of complex requests, more than two iterations are carried

       out with the customer.

6. Evaluation

    In this section, we describe the experimentation we have carried out to eval-
uate our pipeline for exploring business process deviance. The source code is avail-
able on GitHub at https://github.com/jackbergus/CompleteDevianceMining.

                                                  21
 For the construction of the decision trees used in the experiments, we used the
 Python library scikit-learn [40]. For Ripperk, we used JRip available in Weka
 [41].

 6.1. Research Questions
      In order to investigate the impact of diﬀerent types of encodings (sequential,

 declarative and hybrid with and without data) and of the chosen classiﬁer
 (Ripperk and decision trees) on their ability to accurately discriminate between
 non-deviant and deviant executions of a process, the following research questions
 were considered:

RQ1. How does the choice of the trace encoding aﬀect the accuracy of the
         classiﬁcation of traces into deviant and non-deviant, in the proposed
         pipeline?

RQ2. How does the choice of the classiﬁer aﬀect the accuracy of the classiﬁcation
         of traces into deviant and non-deviant, in the proposed pipeline?

RQ3. How does the choice of the trace encoding aﬀect the conciseness of the
         rules describing the diﬀerences between deviant and non-deviant traces?

RQ4. How does the choice of the classiﬁer aﬀect the conciseness of the rules
         describing the diﬀerences between deviant and non-deviant traces?

 RQ1 and RQ2 evaluate how diﬀerent types of features and diﬀerent classiﬁers
 aﬀect the accuracy of the deviance mining task. RQ3 and RQ4, instead, focus
 on how diﬀerent types of features and diﬀerent classiﬁers aﬀect the conciseness
 of the rules used to explain deviances. This is very relevant from the user point
 of view, since more concise rules are more understandable and might generalize
 better over noisy data [42].

 6.2. Datasets and Dataset Labelings
      The evaluation has been carried out using 9 real-life logs. In particular, we

 considered several BPI Challenge Datasets (one log from 2011, one log from

                                                    22
2012, ﬁve logs from 2015), the Sepsis Case event log [43], and the Traﬃc Fine
Management Process log [44].

    The Sepsis Cases event log (sepsis) collects cases of patients with symptoms
of sepsis from a Dutch hospital. Log traces were labeled as:

    • decl: Response(IV Antibiotics, Leucocytes), Response(LacticAcid,
       IV Antibiotics) and Response(ER Triage, CRP) are satisﬁed non-vacuously.

    • mr tr: sequence “Admission NC, CRP, Leucocytes” occurs at least once
       within the trace.

    • mra tra: “IV Liquid, LacticAcid, Leucocytes” occur in any order twice
       within the trace, with interleaving.

    • payload: Trace attribute DisfuncOrg=True.

    The Traﬃc Fine Management Process log (traffic) describes some events
related to the Italian ﬁne system for road traﬃc. Log traces were labeled as:

    • decl: Response(Insert Date Appeal to Prefecture, Add penalty)
       is satisﬁed non-vacuously.

    • mr tr: sequence “Add penalty Payment” occurs at least once within the
       trace.

    • mra tra: “Create Fine, Payment” occur in any order twice within the
       trace, with interleaving.

    • p Art157: Trace attribute article=157.
    • p Pay36: Event attribute paymentAmount=36 at least once.

    The BPI Challenge 2011 log (bpi11) contains data about a Dutch academic
hospital. Each trace represents the clinical history of a patient. Log traces were
labeled as:

    • decl: Init(Outpatient follow-up consultation) is satisﬁed.
    • mr tr: sequence “SGOT, SGPT, Milk acid dehydrogenase LDH, Leukocytes

       electronic count” occurs at least once within the trace.

                                                  23
    • mra tra: “Assumption Laboratory, Milk acid dehydrogenase LDH” oc-
       cur in any order twice within the trace, with interleaving.

    • p M13 [15]: Trace attribute Diagnosis code=M13.
    • p T101 [15]: Trace attribute Treatment code=101.

    The BPI Challenge 2012 log (bpi12) contains data about a Dutch Financial
Institute. The process represented in the event log is an application process for
a personal loan or overdraft within a global ﬁnancing organization. Log traces
were labeled as:

    • decl: Precedence(O ACCEPTED, A APPROVED) is satisﬁed non-vacuously.
    • mr tr: sequence “O SENT, Request Completed, Recall incomplete dossiers”

       occurs at least once within the trace.
    • mra tra: “Handling leads, Request Completed” occur in any order

       three times within the trace, with interleaving.
    • p 45000: Trace attribute AMOUNT REQ=45000.
    • p 6500: Trace attribute AMOUNT REQ=6500.

    The BPI Challenge 2015 logs (bpi15A-bpi15E) come from ﬁve distinct Dutch
municipalities. The logs pertain to the assessment of building permit applications
in each municipality. Each log was labeled as:

    • decl: Existence(01 HOOFD 011) is satisﬁed.
    • mr tr: sequence “08 AWB45 005, 01 HOOFD 200” occurs at least once within

       the trace.
    • mra tra: “01 HOOFD 030 1, 01 HOOFD 510 1” occur in any order twice

       within the trace, with interleaving.
    • payload: Trace attribute monitoringResource=x, where x depends on

       the resource monitored within the dataset (A:560925, B:4634935, C:3442724,
       D:560812, E:560608 ).

                                                  24
6.3. Results
    To answer our research questions, we run the proposed pipeline using diﬀerent

conﬁgurations. In particular, we use as classiﬁers Ripperk and decision trees,
and 3-fold cross-validation to train and test them. In addition, we use grid search
for hyper-parameter tuning. We used all the feature encodings introduced in
Section 5. In the feature discovery step, we set ϑ = 0.3 as minimum support
threshold to generate a suﬃciently high number of features.

    To answer research questions RQ1 and RQ2, we use standard measures, i.e.,
precision, recall, F1, and AUC, to estimate the accuracy of the diﬀerent encodings
and classiﬁers. In particular, we evaluate these metrics, for each classiﬁer, each
encoding (Individual Activities (IA), TR, TRA, MR, MRA, Declare, Hybrid
(H), (Pure) Data, Data + Individual Activities (IA), Data+TR, Data+TRA,
Data+MR, Data+MRA, Data+Declare, Data+Hybrid (H), Data+ Data-aware
Declare (DeclD), H+DeclD, H+Data+DeclD), each dataset and each labeling,
and we average them over the diﬀerent datasets.

    Tables 2 and 3 provide the results obtained using as classiﬁers Ripperk and
decision trees, respectively. The results show that logs labeled using declarative
rules provide, in general, the best performances with the declarative encodings. In
some cases, MRA patterns also are able to predict well the declarative labelings.
This is reasonable since MRA patterns sit in the middle between procedural and
declarative patterns and are capable to characterize “unstructured” behavior.
On the other hand, in most of the cases, MR and TR patterns guarantee a
good performance for procedural labelings. The mra tra labelings tested can be,
instead, accurately predicted using very little information (individual activities
are suﬃcient) and the accuracy measures are equal to 1 for almost all the
encodings. Notice that for both declarative and procedural labelings, using the
hybrid encoding, it is possible to predict the correct label in all cases when using
Ripperk and with a very high accuracy also when using decision trees.

    As expected, the data features are less accurate in predicting control-ﬂow
labels and work better than control-ﬂow features when predicting labels based on
data attributes. However, even in the latter case, the addition of some control-

                                                   25
                                         Table 2. Average accuracy metrics using Ripperk

                                     IA                              MR                              TR                            MRA                            TRA  AUC
Labelling                                AUC Prec Rec F1                 AUC Prec Rec F1                 AUC Prec Rec F1                AUC Prec Rec F1

                   Prec Rec F1

decl       0.96 0.99 0.99 0.97                 0.98 0.98 0.98 0.98             0.95 0.99 0.99 0.97       0.99 0.98 0.99 0.98                  0.95 0.98 0.98 0.96
mr tr      0.88 0.89 0.89 0.89                 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00             1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00       0.99 0.97 0.98 0.98                  0.98 0.98 0.99 0.98
mra tra    1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00             1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00       1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                  1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
payload    0.34 0.21 0.48 0.26                 0.40 0.29 0.59 0.32             0.32 0.23 0.52 0.25       0.47 0.30 0.63 0.33                  0.31 0.21 0.48 0.23

Labelling            Declare                                                      H                           Data                                 DeclD
                 Rec F1                                                  Rec F1                          Rec F1                               Rec F1
           Prec                                AUC   Prec                            AUC   Prec                      AUC                Prec                           AUC

decl       1.00  1.00                    1.00  1.00  1.00                1.00  1.00  1.00  0.81          0.82  0.80  0.81               1.00  1.00  1.00               1.00
mr tr      0.99  1.00                    0.99  0.99  1.00                1.00  1.00  1.00  0.76          0.74  0.77  0.77               0.98  1.00  1.00               0.99
mra tra    1.00  1.00                    1.00  1.00  1.00                1.00  1.00  1.00  0.84          0.83  0.86  0.82               1.00  1.00  1.00               1.00
payload    0.45  0.33                    0.57  0.36  0.35                0.49  0.67  0.37  0.83          0.78  0.88  0.81               0.74  0.86  0.90               0.77

                 Data+IA                             Data+MR                         Data+TR                   Data+MRA                       Data+TRA

Labelling

           Prec Rec F1 AUC Prec Rec F1 AUC Prec Rec F1 AUC Prec Rec F1 AUC Prec Rec F1 AUC

decl       0.95 0.98 0.98 0.96                 0.99 0.98 0.99 0.98             0.95 0.98 0.98 0.96       0.99 0.97 0.98 0.98                  0.95 0.99 0.98 0.96
mr tr      0.94 0.87 0.93 0.88                 0.99 1.00 1.00 0.99             1.00 0.95 0.98 0.96       0.99 0.97 0.99 0.98                  0.98 0.94 0.98 0.94
mra tra    1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00             1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00       1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                  1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
payload    0.88 0.83 0.91 0.84                 0.84 0.80 0.90 0.83             0.84 0.77 0.88 0.81       0.83 0.75 0.87 0.77                  0.87 0.79 0.89 0.84

           Data+Declare                        Data+DeclD                            Data+H                    H+DeclD                        H+Data+DeclD

Labelling

           Prec Rec F1 AUC Prec Rec F1 AUC Prec Rec F1                                                   AUC Prec Rec F1 AUC Prec Rec F1 AUC

decl       1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00             1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00       1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                  1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
mr tr      0.98 0.99 0.99 0.99                 0.98 1.00 1.00 0.99             1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00       1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                  1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
mra tra    1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00             1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00       1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                  1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
payload    0.73 0.85 0.90 0.76                 0.80 0.81 0.89 0.77             0.72 0.88 0.91 0.77       0.75 0.82 0.89 0.76                  0.76 0.82 0.89 0.76

ﬂow information improves the accuracy of the results. The tested classiﬁers have
comparable performance in terms of accuracy. However, Ripperk seems to better
exploit the availability of hybrid features with respect to decision trees.

    To answer research questions RQ3 and RQ4, we compare the average length
of the rules returned by Ripperk and decision trees using all the feature encodings
presented. In particular, in Figure 3, we plot the distribution of the precision of
the mined rules and the average rule length. The diagonal black line represents
the intuition that, by increasing the rule length, we would expect to have an
increase in precision. As already remarked when answering the ﬁrst two research
questions, Ripperk and decision trees have comparable accuracy, while the
encodings combining data and control-ﬂow have a better accuracy with respect
to the ones based on data or control-ﬂow only. However, Ripperk provides
the best trade-oﬀ of conciseness-accuracy since the distribution of its points is

                                                                               26
                 Table 3. Average accuracy metrics using decision tree

                                     IA                              MR                              TR                            MRA                            TRA  AUC
Labelling                                AUC Prec Rec F1                 AUC Prec Rec F1                 AUC Prec Rec F1                AUC Prec Rec F1

                   Prec Rec F1

decl       0.95 0.97 0.98 0.96                 0.98 0.98 0.99 0.98             0.95 0.96 0.98 0.95       0.99 0.98 0.99 0.98                  0.95 0.97 0.99 0.96
mr tr      0.94 0.93 0.97 0.94                 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00             1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00       0.99 0.97 1.00 0.98                  0.99 0.98 0.99 0.99
mra tra    1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00             1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00       1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                  1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
payload    0.34 0.28 0.67 0.29                 0.41 0.33 0.70 0.34             0.33 0.26 0.67 0.28       0.44 0.35 0.70 0.37                  0.33 0.28 0.66 0.28

Labelling            Declare                                                      H                           Data                                 DeclD
                 Rec F1                                                  Rec F1                          Rec F1                               Rec F1
           Prec                                AUC   Prec                            AUC   Prec                      AUC                Prec                           AUC

decl       0.98  0.99                    0.99  0.98  0.98                0.99  0.99  0.98  0.82          0.79  0.82  0.79               0.97  0.96  0.98               0.97
mr tr      0.93  1.00                    0.95  0.96  1.00                1.00  1.00  1.00  0.80          0.79  0.87  0.79               0.99  0.99  0.99               0.99
mra tra    1.00  1.00                    1.00  1.00  0.99                1.00  0.98  0.99  0.82          0.77  0.86  0.79               1.00  1.00  1.00               1.00
payload    0.42  0.51                    0.79  0.40  0.42                0.52  0.78  0.41  0.84          0.79  0.90  0.81               0.68  0.84  0.90               0.72

                 Data+IA                             Data+MR                         Data+TR                   Data+MRA                       Data+TRA

Labelling

           Prec Rec F1 AUC Prec Rec F1 AUC Prec Rec F1 AUC Prec Rec F1 AUC Prec Rec F1 AUC

decl       0.95 0.98 0.98 0.96                 0.98 0.97 0.99 0.98             0.95 0.97 0.98 0.96       0.98 0.98 0.99 0.99                  0.96 0.97 0.99 0.96
mr tr      0.94 0.94 0.96 0.94                 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00             1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00       0.99 0.97 0.99 0.98                  0.99 0.98 1.00 0.99
mra tra    1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00             1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00       1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                  1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
payload    0.86 0.84 0.91 0.84                 0.84 0.83 0.91 0.83             0.84 0.83 0.91 0.83       0.83 0.81 0.90 0.82                  0.84 0.83 0.91 0.83

           Data+Declare                        Data+DeclD                            Data+H                    H+DeclD                        H+Data+DeclD

Labelling

           Prec Rec F1 AUC Prec Rec F1 AUC Prec Rec F1                                                   AUC Prec Rec F1 AUC Prec Rec F1 AUC

decl       0.98  0.99 0.99 0.98                0.97 0.96 0.98 0.97             0.98 0.99 0.99 0.98       0.97 0.96 0.98 0.97                  0.97 0.96 0.98 0.96
mr tr      0.98  1.00 1.00 0.99                0.98 0.98 0.99 0.99             1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00       1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                  0.97 1.00 0.98 0.98
mra tra    0.99  1.00 0.98 1.00                1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00             1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00       1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                  1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
payload    0.70  0.89 0.91 0.75                0.70 0.84 0.90 0.73             0.69 0.89 0.91 0.75       0.68 0.84 0.89 0.73                  0.68 0.84 0.89 0.72

Figure 3. Comparing Ripperk and decision trees for both Average Rule Length and Accuracy.

squeezed towards the y-axis with respect to the one obtained with decision trees.
This eﬀect is more evident when using encodings based on data or control-ﬂow

                                                  27
only.

7. Conclusion

    This paper has focused on approaches for uncovering and explaining (positive
and negative) deviances in business process execution traces. In particular, three
diﬀerent aspects have been investigated.

    First, diﬀerent types of control-ﬂow features were investigated (sequential,
declarative and hybrid) for explaining deviances. The feature types were applied
to diﬀerent real-life logs, by showing advantages and limits of each of them.
Overall, the conclusion was that hybrid encoding is preferable independently of
the nature of the log and the labeling, provided that there is a real correlation
between labels and control-ﬂow. Note that this result is crucial in real settings
in which the nature of the logs and the type of correlation features-labeling is
not known a priori.

    Second, the paper investigated the impact of data (together with declarative
and sequential features) on the capability of existing techniques to explain process
execution deviances. Data features were included using straightforward attribute
extraction and aggregation methods and the discovery of data-aware Declare
constraints. The results showed that the combination of data and control-ﬂow
features increases the performance of deviance mining. However, the extent of
this improvement depends on the characteristics of the log and on the correlation
between labels and features.

    Third, this paper investigated the ﬁnal outcomes of business process deviance
mining returned to the user. More concretely, two diﬀerent classiﬁers were
evaluated (Ripperk and decision trees) and compared them using accuracy
metrics and in terms of conciseness of the returned decision rules. The results
show that the accuracy of Ripperk and decision trees are comparable, while
Ripperk returns shorter rules. In addition, Ripperk is able to better exploit the
availability of hybrid features with respect to decision trees in order to improve
the accuracy of the classiﬁcation. This result suggests that using Ripperk as a

                                                  28
classiﬁer for business process deviance mining is a good alternative to decision
trees, especially for providing more compact explanations to the user.

    For future work, there are several possible directions to go and ways to
improve the present work. One of the possible improvements would be to try
out more feature selection methods to ﬁnd better alternatives to the currently
used coverage method. To further improve the eﬀectiveness of data features,
more feature extraction methods could be considered, especially for extracting
features based on meta-information. In order to assess the understandability of
the returned rules, an empirical study could be carried out with human subjects
for assessing whether more compact rules are actually better than longer ones.
Another possible avenue for future work would be to experiment model-agnostic
explainers for describing the important features in the classiﬁcation process,
which could allow the use of more complex and powerful classiﬁers with respect
to the white-box classiﬁers used in this paper.

References

 [1] W. M. P. van der Aalst, Process Mining - Data Science in Action, Second
      Edition, Springer, 2016.

 [2] A. Augusto, R. Conforti, M. Dumas, M. La Rosa, F. M. Maggi, A. Marrella,
      M. Mecella, A. Soo, Automated discovery of process models from event
      logs: Review and benchmark, IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 31 (4) (2019)
      686–705.

 [3] A. Ostovar, S. J. J. Leemans, M. La Rosa, Robust drift characterization
      from event streams of business processes, ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data
      14 (3) (2020) 30:1–30:57.

 [4] I. Teinemaa, M. Dumas, M. La Rosa, F. M. Maggi, Outcome-oriented
      predictive process monitoring: Review and benchmark, ACM Trans. Knowl.
      Discov. Data 13 (2) (2019) 17:1–17:57.

 [5] R. P. J. C. Bose, W. M. P. van der Aalst, Discovering signature patterns

                                                  29
      from event logs, in: 2013 IEEE Symposium on Computational Intelligence
      and Data Mining (CIDM), 2013, pp. 111–118.
 [6] M. Pesic, Constraint-Based Workﬂow Management Systems: Shifting Con-
      trol to Users, Ph.D. thesis, TU/e (2008).
 [7] S. Suriadi, R. S. Mans, M. T. Wynn, A. Partington, J. Karnon, Measuring
      patient ﬂow variations: A cross-organisational process mining approach, in:
      C. Ouyang, J.-Y. Jung (Eds.), Asia Paciﬁc Business Process Management,
      Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2014, pp. 43–58.
 [8] A. Armas-Cervantes, P. Baldan, M. Dumas, L. Garc´ıa-Ban˜uelos, Behavioral
      comparison of process models based on canonically reduced event structures,
      in: Business Process Management - 12th International Conference, BPM
      2014, Haifa, Israel, September 7-11, 2014. Proceedings, 2014, pp. 267–282.
 [9] S. Suriadi, M. T. Wynn, C. Ouyang, A. H. M. ter Hofstede, N. J. van
      Dijk, Understanding process behaviours in a large insurance company in
      australia: A case study, in: CAiSE 2013, Valencia, Spain, June 17-21, 2013.
      Proceedings, 2013, pp. 449–464.
[10] A. Partington, M. T. Wynn, S. Suriadi, C. Ouyang, J. Karnon, Process
      mining for clinical processes: A comparative analysis of four australian
      hospitals., ACM Trans. Management Inf. Syst. 5 (4) (2015) 19:1–19:18.
[11] R. P. J. C. Bose, W. M. P. van der Aalst, Abstractions in process mining:
      A taxonomy of patterns, in: BPM, Vol. 5701 of Lecture Notes in Computer
      Science, Springer, 2009, pp. 159–175.
[12] D. Lo, S.-C. Khoo, C. Liu, Eﬃcient mining of iterative patterns for software
      speciﬁcation discovery, in: 13th ACM SIGKDD International Conference
      on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’07, 2007, pp. 460–469.
[13] N. Chen, S. C. H. Hoi, X. Xiao, Software process evaluation: A machine
      learning approach, in: Proceedings of the 2011 26th IEEE/ACM Interna-
      tional Conference on Automated Software Engineering, ASE ’11, 2011, pp.
      333–342.
[14] G. T. Lakshmanan, S. Rozsnyai, F. Wang, Investigating clinical care path-
      ways correlated with outcomes, in: F. Daniel, J. Wang, B. Weber (Eds.),

                                                  30
      Business Process Management, 2013, pp. 323–338.
[15] H. Nguyen, M. Dumas, M. La Rosa, F. M. Maggi, S. Suriadi, Mining business

      process deviance: A quest for accuracy, in: On the Move to Meaningful
      Internet Systems: OTM 2014 Conferences, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2014,
      pp. 436–445.
[16] H. Nguyen, M. Dumas, M. La Rosa, F. M. Maggi, S. Suriadi, Business
      process deviance mining: Review and evaluation, CoRR abs/1608.08252.
[17] A. Cuzzocrea, F. Folino, M. Guarascio, L. Pontieri, A multi-view learning
      approach to the discovery of deviant process instances, in: OTM 2015
      Conferences, Springer International Publishing, 2015, pp. 146–165.
[18] A. Cuzzocrea, F. Folino, M. Guarascio, L. Pontieri, A multi-view multi-
      dimensional ensemble learning approach to mining business process de-
      viances, in: IJCNN 2016, 2016, pp. 3809–3816.
[19] A. Cuzzocrea, F. Folino, M. Guarascio, L. Pontieri, Extensions, analysis
      and experimental assessment of a probabilistic ensemble-learning framework
      for detecting deviances in business process instances, in: ICEIS 2017, 2017,
      pp. 162–173.
[20] A. Cuzzocrea, F. Folino, M. Guarascio, L. Pontieri, A robust and versatile
      multi-view learning framework for the detection of deviant business process
      instances, Int. J. Cooperative Inf. Syst. 25 (4) (2016) 1740003:1–1740003:56.
[21] V. Leno, M. Dumas, F. M. Maggi, Correlating activation and target con-
      ditions in data-aware declarative process discovery, in: Business Process
      Management - 16th International Conference, BPM 2018, Sydney, NSW,
      Australia, September 9-14, 2018, Proceedings, 2018, pp. 176–193.
[22] V. Leno, M. Dumas, F. M. Maggi, M. La Rosa, A. Polyvyanyy, Automated
      discovery of declarative process models with correlated data conditions, Inf.
      Syst. 89 (2020) 101482.
[23] E. Lamma, P. Mello, M. Montali, F. Riguzzi, S. Storari, Inducing declarative
      logic-based models from labeled traces, in: BPM 2007, 2007, pp. 344–359.
[24] F. Chesani, C. Di Francescomarino, C. Ghidini, D. Loreti, F. M. Maggi,
      P. Mello, M. Montali, S. Tessaris, Process discovery on deviant traces and

                                                  31
      other stranger things, CoRR abs/2109.14883.
[25] T. Slaats, S. Debois, C. O. Back, Weighing the pros and cons: Process

      discovery with negative examples, in: A. Polyvyanyy, M. T. Wynn, A. V.
      Looy, M. Reichert (Eds.), Business Process Management - 19th International
      Conference, BPM 2021, Rome, Italy, September 06-10, 2021, Proceedings,
      Vol. 12875 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, 2021, pp. 47–64.
[26] A. Cecconi, A. Augusto, C. Di Ciccio, Detection of statistically signiﬁcant
      diﬀerences between process variants through declarative rules, in: Business
      Process Management Forum - BPM Forum 2021, Rome, Italy, September
      06-10, 2021, Proceedings, 2021, pp. 73–91.
[27] P. H. P. Richetti, L. S. Jazbik, F. A. Bai˜ao, M. L. M. Campos, Deviance
      mining with treatment learning and declare-based encoding of event logs,
      Expert Syst. Appl. 187 (2022) 115962.
[28] C. W Gu¨nther, E. Verbeek, Xes standard deﬁnition.
[29] M. Pesic, H. Schonenberg, W. M. P. van der Aalst, Declare: Full support
      for loosely-structured processes, in: 11th IEEE International Enterprise
      Distributed Object Computing Conference (EDOC 2007), 2007, pp. 287–287.
[30] P. Pichler, B. Weber, S. Zugal, J. Pinggera, J. Mendling, H. A. Reijers,
      Imperative versus declarative process modeling languages: An empirical
      investigation, in: BPM Workshops, 2011, pp. 383–394.
[31] M. Montali, M. Pesic, W. M. P. van der Aalst, F. Chesani, P. Mello,
      S. Storari, Declarative Speciﬁcation and Veriﬁcation of Service Choreogra-
      phies, ACM Transactions on the Web 4 (1).
[32] F. M. Maggi, M. Montali, C. Di Ciccio, J. Mendling, Semantical vacuity
      detection in declarative process mining, in: Business Process Management -
      14th International Conference, BPM 2016, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, September
      18-22, 2016. Proceedings, 2016, pp. 158–175.
[33] C. Di Ciccio, F. M. Maggi, M. Montali, J. Mendling, On the relevance of a
      business constraint to an event log, Inf. Syst. 78 (2018) 144–161.
[34] O. Kupferman, M. Y. Vardi, Vacuity detection in temporal model checking.,
      in: CHARME 1999, Vol. 1703, 1999, pp. 82–96.

                                                  32
[35] M. Montali, F. Chesani, P. Mello, F. M. Maggi, Towards data-aware con-

straints in Declare, in: Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium

on Applied Computing, SAC ’13, 2013, pp. 1391–1396.

[36] R. Agrawal, R. Srikant, Fast Algorithms for Mining Association Rules, in:

VLDB 1994, pp. 487–499.

[37] R. O. Duda, P. E. Hart, D. G. Stork, Pattern classiﬁcation, 2nd Edition,

Wiley, 2001.

[38] W. W. Cohen, Fast eﬀective rule induction, in: In Proceedings of the

Twelfth International Conference on Machine Learning, Morgan Kaufmann,

1995, pp. 115–123.

[39] J. R. Quinlan, C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning, Morgan Kaufmann

Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 1993.

[40] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel,

M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos,

D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, E. Duchesnay, Scikit-learn: Machine

learning in Python, Journal of Machine Learning Research 12 (2011) 2825–

2830.

[41] M. Hall, E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer, P. Reutemann, I. H. Witten,

The WEKA data mining software: an update, SIGKDD Explorations 11 (1)

(2009) 10–18.

[42] T. Miller, Explanation in artiﬁcial intelligence: Insights from the social

sciences, Artif. Intell. 267 (2019) 1–38.

[43] Mannhardt, F. (Felix), Sepsis cases - event log (2016). doi:10.4121/UUID:

915D2BFB-7E84-49AD-A286-DC35F063A460.

URL                      https://data.4tu.nl/repository/uuid:

915d2bfb-7e84-49ad-a286-dc35f063a460

[44] M. M. de Leoni, F. Mannhardt, Road traﬃc ﬁne management process (Feb

2015). doi:10.4121/uuid:270fd440-1057-4fb9-89a9-b699b47990f5.

URL https://data.4tu.nl/articles/dataset/Road_Traffic_Fine_

Management_Process/12683249/1

                         33
