arXiv:2303.07280v1 [cs.CV] 13 Mar 2023                                                                                                                                                                      2023-3-14

                                        Vision-Language Models as Success Detectors

                                        Yuqing Du2*, Ksenia Konyushkova1, Misha Denil1, Akhil Raju1, Jessica Landon1, Felix Hill1, Nando de
                                        Freitas1 and Serkan Cabi1
                                        1DeepMind, 2UC Berkeley, *Work done during internship at DeepMind

                                        Detecting successful behaviour is crucial for training intelligent agents. As such, generalisable reward
                                        models are a prerequisite for agents that can learn to generalise their behaviour. In this work we
                                        focus on developing robust success detectors that leverage large, pretrained vision-language models
                                        (Flamingo, Alayrac et al. (2022)) and human reward annotations. Concretely, we treat success detection
                                        as a visual question answering (VQA) problem, denoted SuccessVQA. We study success detection across
                                        three vastly diﬀerent domains: (i) interactive language-conditioned agents in a simulated household,
                                        (ii) real world robotic manipulation, and (iii) “in-the-wild" human egocentric videos. We investigate
                                        the generalisation properties of a Flamingo-based success detection model across unseen language
                                        and visual changes in the ﬁrst two domains, and ﬁnd that the proposed method is able to outperform
                                        bespoke reward models in out-of-distribution test scenarios with either variation. In the last domain
                                        of “in-the-wild" human videos, we show that success detection on unseen real videos presents an even
                                        more challenging generalisation task warranting future work. We hope our initial results encourage
                                        further work in real world success detection and reward modelling.

                                        Keywords: success detection, vision language models, generalisation, reward models

                                        1. Introduction

                                        Being able to detect successful (i.e., preferred) behaviour is a crucial prerequisite for training intelligent
                                        agents. For example, a signal of successful behaviour is necessary as a reward for policy learning, or
                                        as an evaluation metric for identifying performant policies. As such, in this work we are concerned
                                        with developing accurate and generalisable success detectors, which classify if a behaviour is successful
                                        or not. While it is possible to engineer success detectors in speciﬁc domains, such as games (Mnih
                                        et al., 2013) or control tasks (Tunyasuvunakool et al., 2020), in most real-world tasks they can be
                                        challenging to deﬁne. Success detection in realistic settings can be diﬃcult not only due to challenges
                                        with identifying the environment state (e.g., detecting a particular object conﬁguration from pixels),
                                        but also due to ambiguities about what a successful state is (e.g., subjective goals, such as “generate
                                        an entertaining story”). One possible approach for developing success detectors is through reward
                                        modelling with preference data (Abbeel and Ng, 2004; Cabi et al., 2020; Christiano et al., 2017; Ng
                                        et al., 2000; Ouyang et al., 2022). However, the trained preference models are often accurate only
                                        for the ﬁxed set of tasks and narrow environment conditions observed in the preference-annotated
                                        training data, and thus they require extensive labour-intensive annotations for better coverage. This
                                        presents a signiﬁcant bottleneck, as we would like success detectors to be able to generalise broadly –
                                        for instance, once a success detector learns what “successfully picking up a block” looks like, it should
                                        be able to detect this behaviour even if the background or agent morphology changes thanks to a
                                        semantic understanding of “picking up a block”.

                                            Consider success detection in robotic manipulation, where tasks are speciﬁed with language
                                        instructions and observations consist of images. We posit that generalisable success detection is useful
                                        for learning generalisable policies in this domain. Here, eﬀective success detectors should generalise
                                        to task variations along two axes. Firstly, they should generalise to language variations in the task

                                        Corresponding author(s): yuqing_du@berkeley.edu, kksenia@deepmind.com, cabi@deepmind.com
                                        © 2023 DeepMind. All rights reserved
Vision-Language Models as Success Detectors

Q: Did the robot successfully insert a medium gear?

                                                     Answer:_                                                                      yes.
                                                                                                                                   no.
Q: Did the agent successfully place the cactus left of the sofa?
                                                                                                                         Answer:_  yes.
                                                                                                                                    no.
Q: Did the person successfully dip the sponge?
                                                                                                                                   yes.
                                                     Answer:_                                                                       no.

Figure 1 | SuccessVQA: Success detection tasks can be formulated as visual question answering (VQA)
problems. Large multimodal language models, such as Flamingo, oﬀer the opportunity to learn a
generalisable success detector, which can act either as a reward model or agent evaluator in a broad
range of domains.

speciﬁcation. For instance, a model that is trained on detecting success for the instruction “lift a
rubber duck” should also accurately measure success for “lift a toy duck object”. Secondly, success
detectors should generalise to visual variations. For example, if a camera moves or additional objects
are introduced in the scene, the model should still reliably detect success on accomplishing a known
task. Standard reward models are typically trained for ﬁxed conditions and tasks, and are thus unable
to generalise to such variations. As such, adapting success detectors to new conditions typically
requires collecting a new annotated dataset and re-training the model.

    In this work, we aim to train success detectors that are robust with respect to variations in both
language speciﬁcations and perceptual conditions. To this end, we leverage large pretrained vision-
language models (VLMs), such as Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022), as a foundation for learning success
detectors. We hypothesize that Flamingo’s pretraining on vast amounts of diverse language and visual
data will enable learning more robust success detectors. In particular, we show that the same simple
approach of ﬁnetuning Flamingo with human annotations leads to generalisable success detection
across vastly diﬀerent domains. This simple approach allows us to use a uniﬁed architecture and
training scheme, where we require only 1) videos describing the world state, and 2) text describing
the desired behaviour or task. We reframe the problem of success detection as a visual question
answering (VQA) task and refer to this formulation as SuccessVQA (Figure 1).

    Concretely, we ﬁnetune Flamingo for success detection on three diverse domains: a simulated
household (Abramson et al., 2021), real-world robotic manipulation, and in-the-wild egocentric
human videos (Grauman et al., 2022). The universality of the SuccessVQA task formulation is instru-
mental in enabling use of the same training architecture in a wide range of tasks and environments.
We demonstrate that the resulting success detectors are capable of zero-shot generalisation to unseen
conditions (both in language and vision) where bespoke learned reward models fail.

                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                           Vision-Language Models as Success Detectors

2. Related Work

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) Multimodal vision-language models (VLMs) have shown remark-
able success in recent years, where VLMs can serve as a foundation for various tasks using language,
vision, or arbitrary combinations of modalities. VLMs can be trained with contrastive objectives (Jia
et al., 2021; Radford et al., 2021) and/or generative objectives (Alayrac et al., 2022; Dai et al., 2022;
Hu et al., 2021; Luo et al., 2020). In this work we rely on the Flamingo model (Alayrac et al., 2022),
which leverages a contrastive objective for pretraining the vision encoder on text-and-image pairs.
This is combined with a frozen pretrained language model though the Perceiver Resampler and
interleaved cross-attention layers, and optimized with a generative objective. We approach success
detection as a closed-form visual question answering (VQA) task. However, unlike other applications
of VLMs in single-image VQA tasks (Tiong et al., 2022), we rely on videos to specify the world state,
making our work more similar to video QA tasks (Xu et al., 2016). While the original Flamingo work
demonstrates capabilities on video understanding, we extend this approach to training video-based
reward models. Variants of our approach (e.g., by reducing the video input to a single frame) can
also be applied with other VLMs built on large language models (Koh et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023).

Reward Modelling Reward modelling is often necessary when it is challenging to hard-code a
reward function for an agent to learn from. To circumvent this, there has been a rich body of prior
work on learning reward functions from data. When rewards are accessible through a simulator, one
can use supervised learning to train a reward model for model-based agent learning (Hafner et al.,
2023). However, many tasks can be diﬃcult to simulate and hand-engineer simulated rewards for. To
overcome this challenge, one can learn reward models from human data. When demonstrations of
desirable behaviour are available, one can leverage inverse reinforcement learning (IRL), where the
key idea is to recover a reward function that best explains expert behaviour (Baram et al., 2017; Finn
et al., 2016; Fu et al., 2018; Ho and Ermon, 2016; Li et al., 2017; Merel et al., 2017; Ng et al., 2000;
Zhu et al., 2018). However, IRL relies on access to such expert demonstrations, makes assumptions
about the relationship between the expert actions and the true reward, and can be diﬃcult to learn.

    When demonstrations are diﬃcult to acquire, a more natural way of providing human feedback is
through comparative preferences that indicate the degree to which certain agent behaviour is desirable.
This can be done with comparisons of whole episodes (Akrour et al., 2012; Brown et al., 2019; Sadigh
et al., 2017; Schoenauer et al., 2014), trajectory segments (Abramson et al., 2022a; Christiano et al.,
2017; Ibarz et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2021), or even synthesized hypothetical trajectories (Reddy et al.,
2020). These methods then ﬁt a reward function as a preference-predictor, e.g., using a Bradley-Terry
model (Bradley and Terry, 1952). Nevertheless, preferences are not always the most natural form of
feedback from humans, and in many cases we would like the exploit the goal-oriented nature of many
tasks we care about. In other words, sometimes it can be easier for a person to provide direct success
labels or scalar rewards with respect to a given goal. This can be done online in response to observed
agent actions and state transitions (Arumugam et al., 2019; Knox and Stone, 2008; MacGlashan
et al., 2017). In robotics, proposed methods vary from sparse, single frame annotations (Singh et al.,
2019) to dense, whole trajectory annotations (Cabi et al., 2020). In this work we learn from reward
annotations, focusing on training success detectors which can be viewed as binary reward functions.
Since collecting human annotations for each new task and environment can be expensive, we aim to
study whether pretrained, large VLMs can enable learning more generalisable success detectors from
human annotations.

    Large-Scale Pretraining for Success Detectors Our work falls under the general category of
using foundation models as reward models. In language modelling, reward models are typically
trained by ﬁnetuning a pretrained LLM with human preferences over LLM generations. This reward

                                                                                                                                                                                 3
                                                           Vision-Language Models as Success Detectors

model can then be used to ﬁnetune an LLM with ﬁltered supervised ﬁnetuning or reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Askell et al., 2021; Bai et al., 2022; Glaese et al., 2022;
Menick et al., 2022; Nakano et al., 2022; Stiennon et al., 2020). For embodied agents, large-scale
datasets of in-the-wild human videos have been used to train reward models (Chen et al., 2021;
Ma et al., 2022). Rather than using human reward annotations of agent behaviours, these methods
rely on task-annotated human videos of successful behaviours. Most similar to our work, some prior
approaches propose using contrastive VLMs as reward models. In simulated robot domains, Cui et al.
(2022); Mahmoudieh et al. (2022) propose using CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) to generate task rewards
from a text-based goal description and pixel observations. Fan et al. (2022) leverage large-scale
Minecraft data to ﬁnetune a Minecraft-speciﬁc video CLIP model for detecting alignment (i.e., reward)
with text task descriptions. Our work diﬀers in that we leverage a generative VLM built on a frozen
large language model, which we hypothesize enables better language generalisation. We also apply
our method to three vastly diﬀerent domains, including real-world domains where ground truth
rewards are diﬃcult to obtain, and thus directly make use of human annotations.

3. SuccessVQA: Success Detection as a VQA Task

Our primary contribution is SuccessVQA, a framework that allows us to train multi-task success
detectors by directly leveraging powerful pretrained VLMs, such as Flamingo. In SuccessVQA, the
VLM is given a visual input representing the state of the world (e.g., a single image or a short video
clip) and a question asking if the speciﬁed task is successfully accomplished. This problem formulation
has several advantages:

    • It allows us to unify success detection across domains, using the same architecture and training
       scheme. We consider three domains: a simulated 3D playroom used in prior research on
       language-conditioned interactive agents (IA Playroom) (Abramson et al., 2020, 2021), real
       robotic manipulation, and “in-the-wild" human videos from Ego4D (Grauman et al., 2022).

    • Relying on a pretrained vision-language model enables us to harness the advantages of pretrain-
       ing on a large multimodal dataset. We hypothesize that this is the reason for better generalisation
       to both language and visual variations.

    • The task and state speciﬁcation allows us to unify treatment of success detection in tasks
       deﬁned either by singular successful states or target behaviours (i.e., detecting success requires
       reasoning across multiple frames).

SuccessVQA Datasets To create the SuccessVQA datasets, we use behaviour trajectories annotated
by humans to indicate whether a task is completed successfully, and if so, when a success occurs.
There may be multiple annotations per trajectory from diﬀerent human raters. In the cases where
raters disagree, success or failure is determined by a majority vote, and the median (across the
raters who annotated success) of the ﬁrst annotated success frame is used as the ’point of success’.
All subsequent frames are also successful, unless the task is reversed (e.g. removing a gear after
inserting it for the robotics domain). To generate SuccessVQA examples, a trajectory is split into
non-overlapping subsequences (Figure 2). For simplicity, we make the clip lengths the same as the
pretraining clip lengths used for Flamingo: by ﬁrst creating subsequences of length 211 frames,
then downsampling from 30 FPS to 1 FPS to create 8-frame subsequences. We then generate the
VQA question using one of two methods. When trajectories correspond to some known task, we use

the template: “Did the robot/agent/person successfully {task}?”, for example, “Did
the agent successfully place the cactus left of the sofa?” (see Figure 1, ﬁrst and

second rows). When no task is provided but there is a narration corresponding the actions in the

                                                                                                                                                                                 4
                                                        Vision-Language Models as Success Detectors

                                  Annotated trajectory

Agent task: place a cyan pointy object on the bed

Question  SuccessVQA example                                                                              Answer
                                                                                                             no
          Did the agent                                                                                     yes
successfully place a cyan
pointy object on the bed?

Figure 2 | SuccessVQA dataset creation: A trajectory is annotated by human raters with a point
of success (denoted by the trophy). Then the trajectory is split into subsequences and converted to
multiple SuccessVQA datapoints with corresponding questions and answers.

    Question: Did the agent successfully place a cyan pointy object on the bed?

no                                                                                                   yes

Figure 3 | We compute episode-level success detection accuracy during evaluation in order to compare
against bespoke success detection models for each domain. To do this, we create subsequences and
predict success on each clip individually, then consolidate the predictions at an episode level.

clip, as in Ego4D, we use a frozen Flamingo model to rephrase the narrations into questions. For

example, given a narration “The person is scooping the ice cream”, we convert it to the
question “Did the person successfully scoop the ice cream?” (see Figure 1, last row).
Finally, the answer is generated: “yes” if the given subsequence ends in success frames, and “no”

otherwise.

Training and Evaluation We ﬁnetune the Flamingo (3B) vision-language model on the SuccessVQA
dataset for each domain. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnetune all the vision layers (vision encoder, perceiver, and
cross attention layers) and keep the language layers frozen. In the experiments we refer to this model

                                                                                                                  5
                                                           Vision-Language Models as Success Detectors

as the FT Flamingo 3B. For evaluation we compute clip-level success detection accuracy against the
ground truth human annotations on held-out trajectories. In the simulated household and robotics
domains (Sections 4 and 5) we also compute episode-level accuracy to directly compare against
baseline bespoke success detection models, denoted bespoke SD. Note that these baselines were
hand-designed independently and tuned speciﬁcally for each domain. While these models diﬀer from
Flamingo in both pretraining schemes and architecture, they represent a best attempt at designing an
accurate reward model for in-distribution evaluations. Episode-level success detection is computed as
follows: ﬁrst, we generate subsequences from the test trajectories in the same way as during training.
Next, the success detection model classiﬁes each clip individually for success, as illustrated in Figure
3. We consolidate the classiﬁcations in one of two ways. 1) When the success is completely deﬁned
by the observed environment state (as in the robotics tasks), we only look at the ﬁrst and the last
clip of an episode. Then, the entire episode as successful if the ﬁrst clip is in a failure state and the
last clip is in a success state. 2) When the success is deﬁned by a particular behaviour (as in the
simulated household domain), if any subsequence in an episode is classiﬁed as success we classify
the episode as successful. We report balanced accuracy on the test episodes, as there can be a large
imbalance between the number of successful and failure episodes in the dataset. A random model
would achieve 50% balanced accuracy.

Experiments overview We use the SuccessVQA problem formulation to train success detectors
across a diverse range of tasks in vastly diﬀerent domains: simulated household or IA Playroom
(Section 4), robotics (Section 5), and Ego4D videos (Section 6). We investigate whether Flamingo as
a success detector model backbone enables generalisation across the following axes:

    • language generalisation (Section 4). Can we accurately detect success for novel tasks spec-
       iﬁed with language? To answer this question, we evaluate generalisation to unseen tasks

       speciﬁed with language. For example, if we train on detecting success for the task “arrange
       objects in a row”, can we accurately detect success for the task “arrange objects in
       a circle”? For these experiments, we use simulated tasks in the IA Playroom environment

       where the trajectory dataset contains a large and diverse set of language-speciﬁed tasks.
    • visual robustness (Section 5). Can we detect success in the presence of unseen visual variations?

       To answer this question, we evaluate success detection accuracy for a known semantic task, but
       in the presence of naturalistic visual perturbations. In these experiments, we use real-world
       robotic manipulation tasks where we introduce visual variations at test-time using diﬀerent
       camera viewpoints and distractor objects.

We compare our model against bespoke evaluation models designed and trained speciﬁcally for
each domain. We do not necessarily expect the Flamingo-based models to outperform the bespoke
models in a given in-distribution scenario. Rather, we aim to investigate whether the Flamingo-based
models have better robustness to both aforementioned language and visual changes, while also not
requiring any domain-speciﬁc architectural or training changes. We emphasize that the beneﬁt of
SuccessVQA is the simple task formulation that can be applied across a wide range of domains and is
directly amenable for use with large pretrained VLMs. Finally, in Section 6 we show an example of
an in-the-wild SuccessVQA dataset derived from Ego4D (Grauman et al., 2022). Initial results for
success detection in this domain are promising, and we hope to encourage further work on accurate
reward modelling in unstructured real-world settings.

                                                                                                                                                                                 6
                                                           Vision-Language Models as Success Detectors

4. Language Robustness with Interactive Agents (IA Playroom)

In this section we train and evaluate success detectors in the simulated IA Playroom environment,
a diverse 3D house environment designed for training language-conditioned interactive agents
(Abramson et al., 2020, 2021). The environment consists of “a randomised set of rooms, with
children’s toys and domestic objects, as well as containers, shelves, furniture, windows, and doors"
(see Figure 1 in Abramson et al. (2020)). The tasks are generated from human-human interactions
in the IA Playroom, where a setter is instructed to provide a task via language for a solver, e.g.,

"bring me the book from the living room". Success detectors in this environment can

serve as automated evaluators for trained policies.

    There are two properties in this environment that are particularly challenging for automated
success detection: large language variety and the environment’s multi-task nature. Large lan-
guage variations are present because the tasks were originally generated from human interactions,
and people are likely to use diverse language to specify even semantically similar tasks. For ex-

ample, the task of bringing an object to the setter can be phrased in many ways: "bring a
fruit from the pantry", "bring me the banana which is in the pantry", "bring
the yellow coloured object near me". Moreover, success detection in this environment is

intrinsically multi-task in its nature because: (1) there is a vast set of possible tasks that can be
speciﬁed with diﬀerent utterances, and (2) the behaviour of diﬀerent people and trained agents can
vary greatly for the same task. For automated evaluation, it is not scalable to train a new model for
each language and task variation.

4.1. Methodology

Training Dataset We use tasks and trajectories from the Standardized Test Suite (STS), designed
speciﬁcally for evaluating learned Interactive Agents (Abramson et al., 2020, 2021). We focus on
the movement-based tasks: tasks that require the solver agent to move around and interact with the
environment. The STS consists of a set of "scenarios that typify the behaviour [the Interactive Agents
team] wishes to evaluate" (Abramson et al., 2022b), and various trained agent policies are tasked
with accomplishing the given scenarios. These test episodes are then annotated by human raters to
indicate if a task is successfully completed and if so, at which frame success occurred. We use these
annotations to create a SuccessVQA dataset for FT Flamingo 3B ﬁnetuning and to train a bespoke
SD model for comparison. The training set consists of STS and human interaction data collected
between September 2021 to April 2022 (see Figure 4), 546,887 trajectories in total (1,421,111 clips).

Baseline Success Detectors For the bespoke SD baseline, we use a success detection model specif-
ically designed for the STS independently of this work. There are two types of baseline models:
whole episode evaluation and autoregressive evaluation. As the whole episode model consistently
outperformed the autoregressive model, in this section we only report the results from that baseline
(see Appendix A for additional results). This model creates a downsampled set of 32 frames from the
entire evaluation episode and embeds the images with a ResNet-101. The agent input and output
text are embedded using a learned text embedding. All embeddings are then concatenated together
and fed to a transformer with an MLP head that predicts the likelihood the episode was successful. In
addition to training on success detection, an auxiliary instruction-matching contrastive loss is applied.

Evaluation To select the best success detection model, we use the model and checkpoint with the
highest balanced accuracy on a held-out validation split from the same distribution as the training
data. We then evaluate the chosen success detector model across three diﬀerent test sets:

                                                                                                                                                                                 7
                                          Vision-Language Models as Success Detectors

                   Task set 2 Task set 1  Test 1: unseen episodes

                                                                   Test 2: unseen

                                          Training data            behaviour

                                                                   Test 3: unseen
                                                                         tasks

                   September 2021                        April 2022                    August 2022

Figure 4 | IA Playroom datasets split. Training and evaluation splits for IA Playroom STS evaluation.
Test episodes include unseen trajectories, unseen behaviours, and/or unseen language instructions.
See Table 1 for details on the diﬀerent task sets.

      Property     Test 3 Examples
Unseen descriptor  “arrange 4 pointy objects in a square shape in the bed room", where
                   square is not mentioned in the training set. Instead, at train time we have tasks arranging
  Unseen objects   objects in an arc or triangle.
  Unseen actions
                   “push the train engine with water bird", where neither train engine nor
                   bird are mentioned in the training set.

                   “hit the candle using the pillow which is left of airplane in the
                   living room", where the action hit is not mentioned in the training set.

Table 1 | Examples of unseen task variants from Task Set 2, used in Test 3.

• Test 1: unseen episodes (in distribution) – a randomly held-out 10% of training dataset
   trajectories, which includes rephrasings of training tasks. This dataset contains 175,952 clips.

• Test 2: unseen behaviour (out of distribution agents) – trajectories generated by new agents
   on tasks seen in the training dataset, including rephrasings of training tasks. These agents
   potentially demonstrate novel behaviour. This allows us to assess success detector robustness to
   unseen behaviours on known tasks, which is important as it determines if we can reuse the same
   models even as agent behaviour evolves over time (i.e. the success detector should be accurate
   even when the agent solves a known task in a novel way). This dataset contains 462,061 clips.

• Test 3: unseen tasks (out of distribution tasks and agents) – the most challenging setting:
   trajectories generated by new agents on new tasks not seen during training. For examples of how
   these tasks diﬀer from the training set, see Table 1. Note that this set comprises completely new
   tasks as well as rephrasings of said tasks. As the tasks are new, the success detector models need
   to master a semantic understanding of language to properly generalise to success detection in
   this set. This dataset contains 272,031 clips.

4.2. Experimental Results

Table 2 presents the episode-level balanced accuracy on each test set. We ﬁnd that without ﬁnetuning,
the accuracy of the Flamingo model is close to random chance (see Appendix A for details). This
is unsurprising, as the IA domain diﬀers greatly from Flamingo’s pretraining data. With ﬁnetuning
on the same training set, FT Flamingo 3B matches the performance of bespoke SD in both Test 1

                                                                                                                8
Vision-Language Models as Success Detectors

      Model              Test 1:           Test 2:       Test 3:
                   unseen episodes  unseen behaviour  unseen tasks
  bespoke SD
FT Flamingo 3B           80.6%             85.4%          49.9%
                         83.4%             85.0%         59.3%

Table 2 | Zero-shot episode-level balanced accuracies for IA Playroom evaluation models. For reference,
human level balanced accuracy is around 88% due to inter-rater disagreement.

(unseen episodes) and Test 2 (unseen behaviour). More importantly, in Test 3 (unseen tasks), the
performance of a bespoke model drops to a random chance, while FT Flamingo 3B outperforms it
by a signiﬁcant margin (10%), see Table 2. As the instructions in Test 3 are for novel tasks, not just
rephrasings of tasks seen during training, this experiment demonstrates that the success detector
exhibits some amount of semantic understanding of the scenes. We hypothesize that this is possible
due to Flamingo’s large language model backbone and web-scale pretraining. That said, there is
still a large margin for improvement on the most challenging test set. For future work, it would be
interesting to investigate how diﬀerent model scales, dataset sizes, or cross-ﬁnetuning with diﬀerent
datasets can aﬀect generalisation.

5. Visual Robustness with Robotic Manipulation

insert small gear  insert medium gear           insert large gear

remove small gear  remove medium gear           remove large gear

Figure 5 | Successful frames for the 6 robotics gear manipulation tasks: insert small, medium, large,
and remove small, medium, large gear.

    In this section we train and evaluate success detectors on a family of real-life robotic gear
manipulation tasks with a Panda robot arm. There are six tasks corresponding to inserting or
removing a small, medium, or large gear within a basket (Figure 5). We consider visual observations
from a basket camera. Ideally, a success detector should remain accurate under naturalistic visual
changes, such as diﬀerent camera view angles, lighting conditions, or backgrounds. Furthermore,
as the performance of learned policies improves, we may want to introduce new objects or tasks
to the environment. It quickly becomes impractical to re-annotate and re-train success detectors
from previous tasks in new conditions, thus making it important to train visually robust success
detectors. For example, a model that has learned to detect successful gear insertion should still be
able to robustly detect success even if the basket has additional task-irrelevant distractor objects or
the camera angle changes. To investigate this, we experiment with zero-shot evaluations on episodes
with such visual changes.

                                                                    9
                                Vision-Language Models as Success Detectors

                                Annotated trajectory

Robot task: insert medium gear

                                  SuccessVQA example                          Answer
                                                                              no
                                                                    Question
                                                                              yes
Did the robot successfully
      insert medium gear?

Figure 6 | Sample SuccessVQA example created from an annotated subsequence of a gear manipulation
episode. Success annotation is shown with the trophy.

5.1. Methodology

Training dataset Human operators provide 101, 789 demonstrations for 6 tasks using a 6DoF
control device. Each episode is then annotated by humans with rewards for each task (e.g., every
episode has 6 reward annotations, one for each task). Human annotators label positive rewards for
all frames with a success state (i.e., if the task is solved), and zero rewards otherwise. Note that
it is possible for a task to be accidentally undone in the same episode, at which point the reward
annotation would revert to zero. The reward annotations and corresponding episode frames are then
converted into SuccessVQA examples (see Figure 6). The ground truth VQA answer is obtained from
the human annotations: clip answers are labelled successful if they contain only a single transition
from zero to positive reward or only have positive rewards throughout, otherwise they are labelled as
unsuccessful. We train a single FT Flamingo 3B success detector model for all 6 tasks.

Baseline Success Detector As a baseline, we consider a ResNet-based (He et al., 2016) per-frame
success classiﬁcation model, tuned speciﬁcally for this task by the robotics team. The ResNet-18 is
pretrained on ImageNet, and the classiﬁcation layer is swapped out for a binary classiﬁcation layer. We
ﬁnetune a separate success classiﬁcation model for each of the 6 gear tasks, with image augmentations
applied during training. This is distinct from our method where we train a single multi-task model
across all 6 conditions. We consider an episode successful if the ﬁrst and last frames1 of the episode
are classiﬁed as a failure (output < 0.5) and success (output > 0.5) correspondingly. We will further
refer to the baseline model as bespoke success detector (bespoke SD).

Evaluation To compare against the bespoke SD, we look at episode-level balanced accuracy. Given
an evaluation episode, we consider the episode successful under FT Flamingo 3B if the ﬁrst clip is
classiﬁed as unsuccessful and the last clip is classiﬁed as successful (see Figure 11 in the Appendix).
This matches the episode-level classiﬁcation scheme of bespoke SD.

    1We ﬁnd that incorporating more frames does not improve episode-level accuracy.

                                                                              10
         Vision-Language Models as Success Detectors

               Test 1: In-domain:

Test 2: Viewpoint variation (back camera):
      Test 3: Distractor objects (pegs):

Figure 7 | Examples of three evaluation datasets: in-domain episodes similar to the training dataset,
episodes with a diﬀerent camera viewing angle and episodes with distractor objects in the basket.

    We conduct the evaluation on three test sets (see Figure 7):

    • Test 1: In-domain episodes (ﬁrst row),
    • Test 2: Episodes with a viewpoint variation, using a diﬀerent (back) camera (second row),
    • Test 3: Episodes with distractor objects in the basket, but the original camera (last row).

The last two settings are designed to test the robustness of the models to naturalistic visual pertur-
bations in the environment. The trained success detectors can then either be used as automated
evaluators or reward models for agent training.

5.2. Experimental results

In-Domain Performance

In Test 1, we conduct an in-domain evaluation where the test set comes from the same visual conditions
as the training set (see Figure 7, top row). The test set includes all the training episodes and an
additional held out 2076 episodes. The results in Table 3 show that while the bespoke SD consistently
outperforms the FT Flamingo 3B, the performance of the FT Flamingo 3B model is still comparable
for the insertion task. Note that the accuracy of the Flamingo model on the remove tasks is lower,
which we hypothesize is likely due to a data balancing issue. We have 5 times more training data
available for insertion than removal, and training a single model across all tasks likely led to a tradeoﬀ
in accuracy between the insertion and removal tasks, which are temporal opposites of each other.

  bespoke SD    Small    Insert   Large  Small  Remove  Large
FT Flamingo 3B         Medium                   Medium
                98.0%            99.1%   97.3%          98.4%
                96.0%   98.4%    95.0%   82.1%   98.7%  87.2%
                        94.4%                    83.4%

Table 3 | In-Domain Episode-level Accuracy for Gear Manipulation. Balanced accuracy evaluated
on 50,000-60,000 episodes per task.

We further verify that the FT Flamingo 3B success detector can be used to train useful policies

                                                               11
                Vision-Language Models as Success Detectors

using reward-ﬁltered behaviour cloning (BC). In ﬁltered BC, we ﬁrst use FT Flamingo 3B to classify
demonstration episodes as successes or failures for a particular task. Then, we use only the episodes
classiﬁed as success for BC training. Table 4 shows the average success rates of the policies evaluated
on 20 episodes with manual resets. In manual resets no extra gears are pre-inserted on the pegs for
the insert task and only the one relevant gear is pre-inserted for the remove tasks. The success rates
vary between 50% and 75%, suggesting that the accuracy of the success detector models is suﬃcient
for some amount of policy training. To compare with the bespoke SD model, we also conduct ﬁltered
BC training with the bespoke SD reward model and evaluate an insert large gear policy over 100
episodes with automated resets. In automated resets, policies for diﬀerent tasks are run in sequence
one after another and any number of gears might be already inserted at the start of the episode,
presenting a harder scenario. In this case, the success rate is 30% with FT Flamingo 3B is and 33%
with bespoke SD. This provides a preliminary proof-of-concept that the diﬀerence in reward model
accuracy does not lead to a large diﬀerence in policy performance. We leave more detailed policy
evaluations to future work.

                 Insert  Small    Medium  Large
                Remove
                         55%        65%   70%
                         60%        75%   60%

Table 4 | Policy success rates. Policies are trained with ﬁltered behaviour cloning where only
successful episodes are used for training and success is determined by FT Flamingo 3B.

Visual Robustness

Next, we focus on testing the generalisation capabilities of success detectors. We measure zero-shot
accuracy on two natural visual variations described above: Test 2 and Test 3.

    In Test 2, we look at zero-shot robustness to diﬀerent viewpoints (Figure 7, middle row). Given
that the success detectors were only trained on frames from the front basket camera, we evaluate
robustness by measuring success detector accuracy on episodes recorded with the back basket camera.
As we can see in Table 5, changing the camera angle drastically hurts the quality of bespoke SD
(accuracy decreases of 10-50 absolute percentage points) while the performance of FT Flamingo 3B
is more stable (accuracy decreases by less than 10%). Note that in some tasks the performance of the
bespoke model drops to the level of random guessing, essentially rendering the model useless for
success detection. With this, FT Flamingo 3B becomes the best performing model in 5 out of 6 tasks.

  bespoke SD     Small    Insert   Large   Small             Remove   Large
FT Flamingo 3B           Medium                              Medium
                78.0%             50.9%   85.8%                      72.8%
                -19.9%    53.1%   -48.3%  -11.5%              53.8%  -25.5%
                         -45.4%                              -44.9%
                91.0%             89.7%   76.7%                      79.4%
                 -4.0%    89.8%    -5.3%   -5.5%              75.9%   -7.8%
                          -4.6%                               -7.5%

Table 5 | Viewpoint variation. Zero-shot success detection balanced accuracy when trained on the
front camera view and evaluated on the back camera view. We show the absolute balanced accuracy
and the percentage point change compared to Test 1 from Table 3.

    Next, in Test 3 we look at zero-shot robustness in the setting where some distractor objects (two
pegs and a board, see Figure 7, last row) are introduced. Table 6 shows that detecting success on known
tasks across this novel visual setting causes a 4-30% (absolute percentage points) drop in balanced

                                                                             12
                Vision-Language Models as Success Detectors

  bespoke SD    Small   Insert   Large  Small                Remove  Large
FT Flamingo 3B         Medium                                Medium
                88.8%           71.8%   93.6%                        92.4%
                -9.2%   85.0%   -27.4%  -3.8%                 93.8%  -6.0%
                       -13.4%                                 -4.9%
                96.1%           90.6%   82.4%                        84.7%
                +0.1%   95.6%    -4.5%  +0.3%                 83.6%  -2.5%
                       +1.2%                                 +0.1%

Table 6 | Distractor Objects. Zero-shot success detection balanced accuracy on scenes with distractor
objects. We show the absolute balanced accuracy and the percentage point change compared to Test
1 from Table 3.

accuracy for the bespoke model, while the accuracy mostly stays stable for the Flamingo-based models,
with a 4.5% drop in accuracy at most.

    These two experiments demonstrate that Flamingo-based success detection models are robust
to natural visual variations. We hypothesize that the pretrained Flamingo-based success detection
model is better suited to zero-shot visual generalisation than the bespoke baseline reward model, as
Flamingo is pretrained on a diverse set of visual data with corresponding language grounding. While
the baseline model was also pretrained and used image augmentations during task ﬁnetuning, it was
not exposed to such a diverse set of visual data or language. Large-scale diverse pretraining might
contribute to better semantic tasks recognition under naturalistic visual changes. These encouraging
results suggest that pretrained VLM-based success detectors are likely better suited to the real-world
tasks involving unstructured, open, and evolving settings.

6. Real World Success Detection with Ego4D

In this section we describe creating a SuccessVQA dataset using “in-the-wild" egocentric videos of
humans performing tasks. This present a much more diverse setting than the prior two domains,
in both visuals and language. We construct this dataset using annotations from the Ego4D dataset
(Grauman et al., 2022), where unlike prior benchmarks in action recognition, the focus is on detecting
a temporal point of success for a given action. It is an example of a realistic, unstructured setting
where the ground-truth success labels can be obtained only from human annotations. While the FT
Flamingo 3B success detector model shows initial promising results, our experiments show that the
benchmark is nonetheless very challenging with much room for future progress.

     Ego4D is a publicly available dataset of egocentric human-in-the-wild videos. The videos show
people executing common tasks (e.g., washing dishes, cleaning cars, gardening). To generate “suc-
cessful" and “unsuccessful" action sequences, we make use of annotations from the Ego4D Forecasting
+ Hands & Objects (FHO) dataset, where corresponding narrations describe the actions of the camera
wearer in the videos. Additionally, critical state changes are annotated: “how the camera wearer
changes the state of an object by using or manipulating it–which we call an object state change”
(Grauman et al., 2022). Each narration is centered on an 8-second clip, which is further annotated
with action verbs, object nouns, and state change types corresponding to the narration and clip, as
well as the critical frames PRE, Point of No Return (PNR), and POST for indicating when the state
change has occurred. The PNR frame annotates the start of the state change, the PRE frame indicates
a point before the state change, and the POST frame is a point after the state change is completed.

     We propose using the critical frame annotations as annotations of “success" for the behaviour
described in the narration. Speciﬁcally, we treat PNR frame as a point at which “success" occurs. To
generate a negative example for a clip, we use the frames in the 8-second clip prior to the PRE frame.

                                                                            13
                                       Vision-Language Models as Success Detectors         PNR  POST

                                    Annotated trajectory

Narration: #C C rolls the dough
Noun (object of interest): dough
Verb: roll

                                                                                      PRE

                       SuccessVQA example

           Question                                                                             Answer
                                                                                                   no
      Did the person
successfully roll the                                                                             yes

             dough?

Figure 8 | Sample Ego4D clip converted to SuccessVQA Examples. Ego4D annotations include PRE,
POST and PNR (point of no return) annotations which are then used to generate answers in the
SuccessVQA examples.

These frames do not contain the point of success, but they often demonstrate the beginning of the
relevant action. We then generate the questions for SuccessVQA by rephrasing the narrations into
questions using Flamingo, as shown in Figure 8.

    Unlike the IA Playroom and robotics domains where there is only one relevant task per episode,
a single Ego4D “episode" (i.e. video) can have multiple narrations corresponding to diﬀerent actions.
Thus, instead of episode-level accuracy we evaluate success detection accuracy on clips taken from
held out videos. In our experiments, FT Flamingo 3B ﬁnetuned on the SuccessVQA dataset attains
99% training balanced accuracy and 62% test set balanced accuracy. For context, zero shot and
4-shot Flamingo models only achieve 50% and 52%. That is, without ﬁnetuning, the Flamingo model
is not capable of detecting success. Providing a few examples with few-shot prompting improves
performance, but very slightly. However, ﬁnetuning Flamingo on the in-domain Ego4D SuccessVQA
examples achieves a signiﬁcant improvement over random chance. That said, there is still a large gap
between train and test performance. We ﬁnd that it is currently diﬃcult to generalise to completely
unseen videos and language tasks, so this domain provides an exciting avenue for future work.

7. Conclusion

In this work we propose SuccessVQA – a reformulation of success detection that is amenable to
pretrained VLMs such as Flamingo. We investigate success detection across a wide range of domains:
simulated language-conditioned interactive agents, real-world robotic manipulation, and “in-the-wild"
human videos. We ﬁnd that the pretrained VLM has comparable performance on most in-distribution
tasks, and increased robustness across language and visual changes compared to task-speciﬁc reward
models, and emphasize that our contribution is a more universal success detection task formulation
that can be applied easily across vastly diﬀerent domains. VLMs can be used as policies, see e.g., Reed
et al. (2022), but in this work we have demonstrated that there is also great value in using them as
reward models. In contrast to VLMs as policies, VLMs as rewards focuses on the ‘what to do’ and not
on ‘how to do it’. We therefore expect such models to transfer more easily than policies when the

                                                                                                        14
                                                           Vision-Language Models as Success Detectors

same task can be accomplished in many ways, and where ﬁne visual details are not necessary (e.g.,
grasp angle for ﬁne motor control).

    That said, this method has some limitations. There still exist some gaps between the Flamingo-
based reward models and the bespoke reward models in our experiments, especially in some tasks
in the robotics environment. Furthermore, inference with a larger VLM is expensive, making online
success detection challenging. Lastly, we ﬁnd that ﬁnetuning on a suﬃcient amount of in-domain
data is necessary for robust success detection, as zero-shot or few-shot performance is not suﬃcient
yet. Nonetheless, we are optimistic that further progress on broadly improving VLMs will result in
more accurate few-shot success detection.

    To address the limitations of the current approach, improving inference speed or distillation to a
smaller model can help with eﬃcient online success detection. Before deployment as a reward model
for learning policies, we need further investigations into model accuracy and thorough characteriza-
tions of the eﬀects of false positives and false negatives. So far we have experimented with a Flamingo
3B, but larger models might bring further improvements in robustness and generalisation. Another
interesting avenue would be to investigate the practicality of in-domain few-shot generalisation to
novel tasks (e.g., train on ‘insert gear’ tasks, then detect success on ‘remove gear’ after prompting
with a few examples). An interesting question is when to choose few-shot or ﬁnetuning and how
to combine the two. The shared SuccessVQA format can enable shared ﬁnetuning across diﬀerent
datasets (e.g., combining Ego4D SuccessVQA and VQAv2 (Goyal et al., 2017)) to study the impact of
cross-task transfer. Lastly, the ﬂexibility in input format of VLM models allows us to consider success
detection tasks where the task is speciﬁed visually (e.g., with a goal image) or the state is described
in language (e.g., a dialogue agent) in the same framework as the current work.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Olivia Watkins and Antoine Miech for careful proofreading of the paper and
detailed comments. We would also like to thank the DM Robotics Team, the Interactive Agents team,
and the Flamingo team for insightful discussions and research support.

References

P. Abbeel and A. Y. Ng. Apprenticeship learning via inverse reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of
   the twenty-ﬁrst international conference on Machine learning, page 1, 2004.

J. Abramson, A. Ahuja, I. Barr, A. Brussee, F. Carnevale, M. Cassin, R. Chhaparia, S. Clark, B. Damoc,
   A. Dudzik, et al. Imitating interactive intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.05672, 2020.

J. Abramson, A. Ahuja, A. Brussee, F. Carnevale, M. Cassin, F. Fischer, P. Georgiev, A. Goldin, T. Harley,
   et al. Creating multimodal interactive agents with imitation and self-supervised learning. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2112.03763, 2021.

J. Abramson, A. Ahuja, F. Carnevale, P. Georgiev, A. Goldin, A. Hung, J. Landon, J. Lhotka, T. Lillicrap,
   A. Muldal, et al. Improving multimodal interactive agents with reinforcement learning from human
   feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.11602, 2022a.

J. Abramson, A. Ahuja, F. Carnevale, P. Georgiev, A. Goldin, A. Hung, J. Landon, T. Lillicrap, A. Muldal,
   B. Richards, et al. Evaluating multimodal interactive agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.13274,
   2022b.

                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                           Vision-Language Models as Success Detectors

R. Akrour, M. Schoenauer, and M. Sebag. APRIL: Active preference learning-based reinforcement
   learning. In European Conference on Machine Learning and Principles and Practice of Knowledge
   Discovery in Databases, 2012.

J.-B. Alayrac, J. Donahue, P. Luc, A. Miech, I. Barr, Y. Hasson, K. Lenc, A. Mensch, K. Millican,
   M. Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: a visual language model for few-shot learning. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2204.14198, 2022.

D. Arumugam, J. K. Lee, S. Saskin, and M. L. Littman. Deep reinforcement learning from policy-
   dependent human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.04257, 2019.

A. Askell, Y. Bai, A. Chen, D. Drain, D. Ganguli, T. Henighan, A. Jones, N. Joseph, B. Mann, N. DasSarma,
   et al. A general language assistant as a laboratory for alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00861,
  2021.

Y. Bai, A. Jones, K. Ndousse, A. Askell, A. Chen, N. DasSarma, D. Drain, S. Fort, D. Ganguli, T. Henighan,
   et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862, 2022.

N. Baram, O. Anschel, I. Caspi, and S. Mannor. End-to-end diﬀerentiable adversarial imitation learning.
   In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.

R. A. Bradley and M. E. Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method of paired
   comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.

D. Brown, W. Goo, P. Nagarajan, and S. Niekum. Extrapolating beyond suboptimal demonstrations via
   inverse reinforcement learning from observations. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2019.

S. Cabi, S. Gómez Colmenarejo, A. Novikov, K. Konyushkova, S. Reed, R. Jeong, K. Zolna, Y. Aytar,
   D. Budden, M. Vecerik, O. Sushkov, D. Barker, J. Scholz, M. Denil, N. de Freitas, and Z. Wang.
   Scaling data-driven robotics with reward sketching and batch reinforcement learning. In Robotics:
  Science and Systems Conference, 2020.

A. S. Chen, S. Nair, and C. Finn. Learning generalizable robotic reward functions from" in-the-wild"
   human videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.16817, 2021.

P. F. Christiano, J. Leike, T. Brown, M. Martic, S. Legg, and D. Amodei. Deep reinforcement learning
   from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Y. Cui, S. Niekum, A. Gupta, V. Kumar, and A. Rajeswaran. Can foundation models perform zero-shot
   task speciﬁcation for robot manipulation? In Learning for Dynamics and Control Conference, pages
   893–905. PMLR, 2022.

W. Dai, L. Hou, L. Shang, X. Jiang, Q. Liu, and P. Fung. Enabling multimodal generation on clip via
  vision-language knowledge distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.06386, 2022.

L. Fan, G. Wang, Y. Jiang, A. Mandlekar, Y. Yang, H. Zhu, A. Tang, D.-A. Huang, Y. Zhu, and
  A. Anandkumar. Minedojo: Building open-ended embodied agents with internet-scale knowledge.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.08853, 2022.

C. Finn, S. Levine, and P. Abbeel. Guided cost learning: Deep inverse optimal control via policy
   optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2016.

                                                                                                                                                                               16
                                                           Vision-Language Models as Success Detectors

J. Fu, K. Luo, and S. Levine. Learning robust rewards with adversarial inverse reinforcement learning.
   In International Conference for Learning Representations, 2018.

A. Glaese, N. McAleese, M. Trebacz, J. Aslanides, V. Firoiu, T. Ewalds, M. Rauh, L. Weidinger,
   M. Chadwick, P. Thacker, L. Campbell-Gillingham, J. Uesato, P.-S. Huang, R. Comanescu, F. Yang,
  A. See, S. Dathathri, R. Greig, C. Chen, D. Fritz, J. S. Elias, R. Green, S. Mokrá, N. Fernando,
   B. Wu, R. Foley, S. Young, I. Gabriel, W. Isaac, J. Mellor, D. Hassabis, K. Kavukcuoglu, L. A.
   Hendricks, and G. Irving. Improving alignment of dialogue agents via targeted human judgements.
   arXiv:2209.14375, 2022.

Y. Goyal, T. Khot, D. Summers-Stay, D. Batra, and D. Parikh. Making the v in vqa matter: Elevating
   the role of image understanding in visual question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
  on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 6904–6913, 2017.

K. Grauman, A. Westbury, E. Byrne, Z. Chavis, A. Furnari, R. Girdhar, J. Hamburger, H. Jiang, M. Liu,
  X. Liu, et al. Ego4d: Around the world in 3,000 hours of egocentric video. In Proceedings of the
   IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 18995–19012, 2022.

D. Hafner, J. Pasukonis, J. Ba, and T. Lillicrap. Mastering diverse domains through world models.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104, 2023.

K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of
   the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 770–778, 2016.

J. Ho and S. Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. In Advances in Neural Information
   Processing Systems, 2016.

X. Hu, Z. Gan, J. Wang, Z. Yang, Z. Liu, Y. Lu, and L. Wang. Scaling up vision-language pre-training
   for image captioning. arXiv:2111.12233, 2021.

B. Ibarz, J. Leike, T. Pohlen, G. Irving, S. Legg, and D. Amodei. Reward learning from human
   preferences and demonstrations in atari. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31,
  2018.

C. Jia, Y. Yang, Y. Xia, Y.-T. Chen, Z. Perekh, H. Pham, Q. V. Le, Y. Sung, Z. Li, and T. Duerig. Scaling
   up visual and vision-language representation learning with noisy text supervision. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.

W. B. Knox and P. Stone. Tamer: Training an agent manually via evaluative reinforcement. In 2008
  7th IEEE international conference on development and learning, pages 292–297. IEEE, 2008.

J. Y. Koh, R. Salakhutdinov, and D. Fried. Grounding language models to images for multimodal
   generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13823, 2023.

K. Lee, L. Smith, and P. Abbeel. Pebble: Feedback-eﬃcient interactive reinforcement learning via
   relabeling experience and unsupervised pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.05091, 2021.

J. Li, D. Li, S. Savarese, and S. Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen
   image encoders and large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12597, 2023.

Y. Li, J. Song, and S. Ermon. InfoGAIL: Interpretable imitation learning from visual demonstrations.
   In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.

H. Luo, L. Ji, B. Shi, H. Huang, N. Duan, T. Li, J. Li, T. Bharti, and M. Zhou. Univl: A uniﬁed video and
   language pre-training model for multimodal understanding and generation. . arXiv:2002.06353,
  2020.

                                                                                                                                                                               17
                                                           Vision-Language Models as Success Detectors

Y. J. Ma, S. Sodhani, D. Jayaraman, O. Bastani, V. Kumar, and A. Zhang. Vip: Towards universal visual
   reward and representation via value-implicit pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.00030, 2022.

J. MacGlashan, M. K. Ho, R. Loftin, B. Peng, G. Wang, D. L. Roberts, M. E. Taylor, and M. L. Littman.
   Interactive learning from policy-dependent human feedback. In International Conference on Machine
   Learning, pages 2285–2294. PMLR, 2017.

P. Mahmoudieh, D. Pathak, and T. Darrell. Zero-shot reward speciﬁcation via grounded natural
   language. In ICLR 2022 Workshop on Generalizable Policy Learning in Physical World, 2022.

J. Menick, M. Trebacz, V. Mikulik, J. Aslanides, F. Song, M. Chadwick, M. Glaese, S. Young, L. Campbell-
  Gillingam, G. Irving, and N. McAleese. Teaching language models to support answers with veriﬁed
   quotes. arXiv:2203.11147, 2022.

J. Merel, Y. Tassa, S. Srinivasan, J. Lemmon, Z. Wang, G. Wayne, and N. Heess. Learning human
   behaviors from motion capture by adversarial imitation. arXiv:1707.02201, 2017.

V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou, D. Wierstra, and M. Riedmiller. Playing
   atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.

R. Nakano, J. Hilton, S. Balaji, J. Wu, L. Ouyang, C. Kim, C. Hesse, S. Jain, V. Kosaraju, W. Saunders,
  X. Jiang, K. Cobbe, T. Eloundou, G. Krueger, K. Button, M. Knight, B. Chess, and J. Schulman.
  Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback. arXiv:2112.09332, 2022.

A. Y. Ng, S. Russell, et al. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In Icml, volume 1, page 2,
  2000.

L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. L. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, C. Zhang, S. Agarwal, K. Slama,
  A. Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2203.02155, 2022.

A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin,
  J. Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Interna-
   tional Conference on Machine Learning, pages 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

S. Reddy, A. Dragan, S. Levine, S. Legg, and J. Leike. Learning human objectives by evaluating
   hypothetical behavior. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 8020–8029. PMLR,
  2020.

S. Reed, K. Zolna, E. Parisotto, S. G. Colmenarejo, A. Novikov, G. Barth-Maron, M. Gimenez, Y. Sulsky,
  J. Kay, J. T. Springenberg, T. Eccles, J. Bruce, A. Razavi, A. Edwards, N. Heess, Y. Chen, R. Hadsell,
  O. Vinyals, M. Bordbar, and N. de Freitas. A generalist agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06175,
  2022.

D. Sadigh, A. D. Dragan, S. Sastry, and S. A. Seshia. Active preference-based learning of reward
   functions. In Robotics: Science and Systems Conference, 2017.

M. Schoenauer, R. Akrour, M. Sebag, and J.-C. Souplet. Programming by feedback. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2014.

A. Singh, L. Yang, K. Hartikainen, C. Finn, and S. Levine. End-to-end robotic reinforcement learning
  without reward engineering. In Robotics: Science and Systems Conference, 2019.

N. Stiennon, L. Ouyang, J. Wu, D. M. Ziegler, R. Lowe, C. Voss, A. Radford, D. Amodei, and P. Christiano.
   Learning to summarize from human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2020.

                                                                                                                                                                               18
                                                           Vision-Language Models as Success Detectors

A. M. H. Tiong, J. Li, B. Li, S. Savarese, and S. C. Hoi. Plug-and-play vqa: Zero-shot vqa by conjoining
   large pretrained models with zero training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.08773, 2022.

S. Tunyasuvunakool, A. Muldal, Y. Doron, S. Liu, S. Bohez, J. Merel, T. Erez, T. Lillicrap, N. Heess,
   and Y. Tassa. dm_control: Software and tasks for continuous control. Software Impacts, 6, 2020.

J. Xu, T. Mei, T. Yao, and Y. Rui. Msr-vtt: A large video description dataset for bridging video and
   language. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
   5288–5296, 2016.

Y. Zhu, Z. Wang, J. Merel, A. A. Rusu, T. Erez, S. Cabi, S. Tunyasuvunakool, J. Kramár, R. Hadsell,
   N. de Freitas, and N. Heess. Reinforcement and imitation learning for diverse visuomotor skills. In
   Robotics: Science and Systems Conference, 2018.

                                                                                                                                                                               19
                                                           Vision-Language Models as Success Detectors

A. Simulated household domain

To evaluate agent policies on the standardized set of scenarios (STS), each agent is ﬁrst given a period
of context to replay up to a "continuation point", after which the agent policy is used to complete the
trajectory. Each continuation is then evaluated oﬄine by human annotators as either successful or
failure, along with the point at which success or failure occurs. These human annotations are then
used to rank agent policies, using the proportion of successful annotations they receive. For more
details on the evaluation procedure, see Abramson et al. (2022b).
A.1. Baseline Evaluation Models
While human evaluations provide the ground truth signal for assessing agent capabilities, the cost
of annotations scales directly with the number of evaluations for each new task and agent. Thus,
there has been interest in automating the evaluation protocol to enable evaluation to scale over time.
Ideally, an automated evaluation model will condition on an episode of agent behaviour and the input
task utterance, and output a classiﬁcation whether or not the task is successful.

    Currently two baseline evaluation models have been developed for the STS: whole-episode and
autoregressive models. In both cases, the reward annotations for a particular episode are aggregated
using majority voting.

    Whole episode evaluation models.

Figure 9 | Whole Episode Bespoke Evaluation Model
    For these models, we ﬁrst preprocess an STS episode by downsampling it to 32 frames and

tokenizing the text instruction and agent responses. The images are then embedded with a ResNet-
101, the input and output text are embedded, and these embeddings are concatenated together and
fed to a transformer with 16 layers and 16 attention heads. The transformer output is fed through two
MLP heads: one to predict the likelihood of the episode being successful, P(success), and an auxiliary
contrastive loss, P(matching). P(success) is supervised with the aggregated reward annotations, and

                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                           Vision-Language Models as Success Detectors

P(matching) is trained to predict whether an instruction matches the episode or has been shuﬄed.
    Autoregressive evaluation models. The autoregressive evaluation models use the same architec-

Figure 10 | Autoregressive Bespoke Evaluation Model

ture as the Playhouse agents, which takes inputs on a per-frame basis, rather than at the episode level.
The model embeds the images and language for each frame, passes the embeddings to a multimodal
transformer followed by an LSTM, and is asked to predict success or no-success on a per frame basis.
The success of an entire episode is then determined by whether or not any single frame was predicted
to be successful.

                Model                Test 1:                Test 2:          Test 3:
                               unseen episodes       unseen behaviour  unseen language
Baseline Whole Episode Model
Baseline Autoregressive Model        80.6%                  85.4%            49.9%
                                     71.7%                  70.4%         (not tested)
           Flamingo 3B                50%                    50%
         FT Flamingo 3B              83.4%                  85.0%              50%
                                                                             59.3%

Table 7 | Zero-shot episode-level balanced accuracies for IA Playroom STS evaluation models. For
reference, human level balanced accuracy is around 88%.

                                                                                        21
                    Vision-Language Models as Success Detectors

B. Robotics domain

B.1. Ground truth in robotics domain

Figure 11 shows how the ground truth success and failure labels are assigned to the full episodes. For
an episode to be successful, it must start in a failure state and terminate in a success state.

                    Start state    End state       Ground truth label

                                                   Success

                    failure state  success state

                                                   Failure

                    success state  failure state

                                                   Failure

                    success state  success state

                                                   Failure

                    failure state  failure state

Figure 11 | Ground truth labels for robotics tasks. The episode is considered positive only when it
starts in a failure state and ends in a success state, all other episodes are considered as negative.

B.2. Data Eﬃciency in robotics domain

We investigate whether the pretraining used for Flamingo makes it more amenable to accurate success
detection in the lower-data regime. For this set of experiments, we train on only 100-200 episodes
(100x less than the tens of thousands of episodes used in the above experiments) per task and evaluate
on the same in-domain test set. As shown in Table 8, for ﬁve of the six tasks the Flamingo-based
model is less aﬀected by the smaller dataset than the ResNet-based model.

Balanced Accuracy                    Insert Small   Insert Medium    Insert Large
    bespoke SD
                                   68.7% (-29.2%)  70.2% (-28.3%)  89.7% (-9.4%)
 FT Flamingo 3B                     77.6% (-18.3)   85.3% (-9.1%)  93.2% (-1.8%)

    bespoke SD                      Remove Small   Remove Medium   Remove Large
 FT Flamingo 3B
                                   86.7% (-10.6%)   95.3% (-3.4%)  95.7% (-2.7%)
                                   70.5% (-11.6%)  86.7% (+3.3%)   87.1% (-0.0%)

Table 8 | Data Eﬃciency – train on 100-200 episodes, evaluate on 50-60k episodes.

                                                                                   22
