arXiv:2606.09547v2 [cs.CV] 17 Jun 2026  Streaming Interventions: Can Video Large Language
                                                Models Correct Mistakes as They Occur?

                                                        Apratim Bhattacharyya1 Shweta Mahajan2, 3∗ Sanjay Haresh1
                                                   Rajeev Yasarla1 Reza Pourreza1 Litian Liu1 Risheek Garrepalli1

                                                                                       Roland Memisevic1
                                                        1 Qualcomm AI Research† 2 York University 3 Vector Institute for AI

                                                                                    Abstract

                                                   Learning everyday skills, like cooking a dish, relies increasingly on instructional
                                                   media such as online videos. This opens the door to the use of video (and mul-
                                                   timodal) large language models (LLMs) as task guidance assistants. A crucial
                                                   capability for the real-world success of a prospective task guidance assistant is its
                                                   ability to intervene proactively as soon as a mistake is apparent in order to guide the
                                                   user. To evaluate this crucial capability, we introduce EGO-MC-BENCH (Mistake
                                                   Corrections), a benchmark for evaluating reactive, step-by-step task guidance in
                                                   realistic cooking scenarios. Extensive experiments show that EGO-MC-BENCH
                                                   is highly challenging for state-of-the-art video LLMs. We argue that a key reason
                                                   is the limited availability of training data for fine-tuning models on this task. Al-
                                                   though there exists a wide range of cooking video datasets, existing datasets lack
                                                   examples of mistakes along with appropriately timed interventions. To help address
                                                   this data limitation, we also introduce EGO-COMIST, a counterfactual synthetic
                                                   dataset created by transforming non-interactive cooking videos into supervised
                                                   training examples showing proactive interventions. We show that fine-tuning on
                                                   EGO-COMIST yields performance gains especially for smaller and more efficient
                                                  video LLMs that are well suited for delivering assistance on edge devices.

                                        1 Introduction

                                        Traditionally, learning an everyday skill, such as preparing a new dish, requires reading a recipe or
                                        watching a video. Although being taught by domain experts, such as a chef, would be preferable,
                                        this option is typically not available or too costly. Advances in multimodal large language models
                                        (LLMs) now allow AI systems to understand and respond to speech, audio, and visual inputs in real
                                        time [27, 36, 38, 46]. This creates an opportunity to leverage such models for live, step-by-step
                                        guidance by emulating domain experts.

                                        For multimodal and video LLMs to act as true multimodal assistants, they need to react proactively
                                        to events in live video streams. Consider the example in Fig. 1 (top), where a person prepares
                                        Tomato Gnocchi. The recipe calls for two teaspoons of salt. The model should perceive that only
                                        one teaspoon has been added, infer from the video that the user does not intend to add more, and
                                        proactively prompt them to add the second teaspoon. Once the user does so, the model should detect
                                        and signal completion of this step. However, current benchmarks in this area [5, 41, 43] either test a
                                        limited subset of conversational abilities or re-purpose non-reactive data—providing only a partial
                                        assessment of proactive assistance capabilities of multimodal and video LLMs.

                                        Existing attempts to build assistants for proactive task guidance in the real world have been met with
                                        limited success [5, 51]. This is in spite of the fact that there are many large scale datasets in the

                                           ∗Work done while employed at Qualcomm AI Research.
                                            †Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
Tomato Gnocchi

Instruction: Add two teaspoons        [User gets salt container]          [User adds first teaspoon]
        of salt to the water.

[User closes salt container]          Feedback: You should add two        Success: Good job!
                                             teaspoons, not one.
   Apple Toast

 Instruction: Now cut the apple       [User cuts the                      Feedback: The apple slices are too
into half and then slice half of the  apple into half]                    thick. Make sure that you make thin

       apple into thin slices.                                             slices, about half the current size.

[User slices quarter of the           Feedback: You should slice atleast  Success: Good job!
  apple into slices of the                      half of the apple.
    correct thickness]

Figure 1: Our EGO-MC-BENCH: interventions with appropriate feedback whenever a mistake is
apparent, guiding the user towards successful goal completion across recipe steps.

cooking domain [8, 20, 30, 52]. The key challenge is that such datasets lack suitable demonstrations
of mistakes and corresponding interventions and feedbacks. Furthermore, collecting such high-quality
supervision at scale is prohibitively expensive.

In this work, we introduce a novel benchmark and data generation pipeline to help address these issues.
Our contributions in detail are, 1. We propose the Qualcomm Interactive Cooking: EGO-MC-BENCH
(Mistake Corrections)‡, the first benchmark to evaluate the step-by-step task guidance capabilities
of multimodal LLMs in a truly reactive setup. EGO-MC-BENCH evaluates the ability of a model
to intervene as soon as a mistake is apparent by providing appropriate feedback and thus guiding
users to successful task completion. 2. We propose Qualcomm Interactive Cooking: EGO-COMIST, a
novel synthetic dataset created by re-purposing existing (non-interactive) datasets towards supervised
training on proactive, streaming task guidance. Overall, this represents a significant expansion of the
Qualcomm Interactive Cooking Dataset [5]. 3. We present extensive experiments which demonstrate
that the interactive task guidance task in our EGO-MC-BENCH is highly challenging for state of
the art video LLMs. 4. We show that fine-tuning a model on the EGO-COMIST dataset leads to
significant improvements in successful mistake interventions, especially for efficient video LLMs
well suited for edge-deployment.

     ‡Qualcomm Interactive Cooking: EGO-MC-BENCH – available at this URL and EGO-COMIST – available at this URL

                                                           2
Table 1: Here, Multi-step Goal Driven refers to whether the videos are driven by a specific goal (e.g.,
cooking a recipe); Step-by-Step Instructions: whether the videos contain participants following a set
of step-by-step instructions; Timed Feedback: whether the participants receive timed feedback per
step that is sufficient to guide the subjects to the goal; Reactive Participants: whether the participants
react to the feedback and correct their actions to successfully complete the complex multi-step goal.

Dataset            Domain         Multi-step  Step-by-Step   Timed     Reactive     Length
                                 Goal Driven  Instructions  Feedback  Participants   (hrs)

Assembly-101 [32]  Toy Assembly  ✓            ×             ×         ×             513
HowTo100M [25]
COIN [35]          Diverse       ✓            ✓             ×         ×             134k
YouCookv2 [52]
WTAG [4]           Diverse       ✓            ✓             ×         ×             512
HoloAssist [41]
QEVD [28]          Cooking       ✓            ✓             ×         ×             176
QICD [5]
                   Cooking       ✓            ✓             ×         ×             10

                   Obj. manip.   ×            ✓             ✓         ✓             166

                   Fitness       ×            ✓             ✓         ✓             474

                   Cooking       ✓            ✓             ✓         ×             94

EGO-COMIST (Ours)  Cooking       ✓            ✓             ✓         ×             124

EGO-MC-BENCH (Ours) Cooking      ✓            ✓             ✓         ✓             10

2 Related Work

Multimodal and Video LLMs. Vision–language models have advanced rapidly on the heels of
breakthroughs in large-scale language modeling. Early work such as Flamingo [2] paired a pretrained
language model with learnable vision adapters, aligning visual and linguistic representations to
enable strong zero- and few-shot performance. This paradigm has since yielded a diverse family
of large multimodal language models [1, 3, 13, 18, 37–39] with strong results on video under-
standing. Progress has been further catalyzed by broad evaluation suites such as Video-MME [16],
Video-MMMU [21], and LongVideoBench [44]. However, most existing models and benchmarks re-
main largely turn-based: responses only when explicitly prompted instead of proactively monitoring,
or reacting to, the unfolding events in the stream. In contrast, our EGO-MC-BENCH benchmark and
EGO-COMIST synthetic data generation pipelines are designed for interactive scenarios, where a
model must track events in its input video stream and respond without explicit user prompts.

Streaming Video LLMs. Standard video LLMs struggle with the temporal demands of streaming
inputs, motivating recent models that respond interactively to live video. A foundational effort
is VideoLLM-online [6], trained to narrate egocentric streams. Building on this, works such as
StreamMind [11], Flash-VStream [50], LiveVLM [26], and ReKV [10] propose more efficient
architectures for the streaming narration setting. StreamingVLM [47] extends narration to hour-long
videos by using attention sinks, while LION-FS [22] adopts a two-stream fast–slow vision encoder to
improve visual grounding and accuracy. A different interaction scenario is considered by ViSpeak [17],
which enables models to respond to gestures and body language in real time. In contrast to narration
or QA, we study the streaming intervention task: detecting both mistakes and step completions
within a procedural activity and intervene at the right moment, which requires fine-grained tracking
of progress toward the target goal.

Benchmarks and Datasets for Streaming Video. VideoLLM-online [6] introduced an Ego4D-based
narration dataset instrumental in the development of streaming video LLMs. LiveCC [7] contributed
ASR-aligned datasets for live sports commentary. ProactiveQA [51] provides a streaming dialogue and
question-answering dataset over egocentric videos. SVBench [48], OmniNMI [42], Ovo-Bench [23],
and Streamo [45] target streaming dialogue and QA over general, real-world videos. By contrast,
datasets such as HoloAssist [41], WTAG [4], and QEVD [29] are designed for interactive assistance
that delivers live feedback in daily-life, cooking, and fitness scenarios. However, unlike our EGO-
MC-BENCH benchmark, these datasets do not provide multi-step feedback that guides users toward
successful completion of complex goals as shown in Tab. 1. Finally, the base Qualcomm Interactive
Cooking Dataset [5] (QICD) frames step-by-step task guidance in a non-reactive setting. In contrast,
EGO-MC-BENCH is explicitly reactive, evaluating interventions to mistakes as they occur.

                                                           3
3 EGO-MC-BENCH

We introduce Qualcomm Interactive Cooking: EGO-MC-BENCH (Fig. 1), a benchmark for evaluating
multi-modal assistants that guide users step by step through cooking tasks with multi-step recipes.
EGO-MC-BENCH targets two core capabilities: (i) detecting step completion and (ii) intervening
on mistakes with timely, corrective feedback (we define mistakes as actions that directly impede
recipe completion). Prior step-by-step benchmarks [5] are derived from non-interactive datasets (e.g.,
CaptainCook4D [30]), producing non-reactive scenarios where users cannot respond to feedback. In
contrast, EGO-MC-BENCH models a realistic interactive setting: users react to feedback, and the
assistant actively guides them toward successful completion.

Benchmark Collection. The EGO-MC-BENCH
benchmark is recorded in an interactive live setup.
The recording is performed using a head mounted
camera in a kitchen. An instructor provides step
by step instructions and feedback. The step by step
instructions are recipe steps of varying complexity
(Fig. 1). The instructor is positioned behind the par-
ticipant as shown in Fig. 2 such that the instructor
can observe the user actions in detail while not be-
ing in the field of view of the head mounted camera. Figure 2: Recording setup: Dashed lines show
The participants are not provided with the recipe be- the camera’s field of view.
forehand. This setup simulates real-world scenarios
where an assistant guides a user step by step through a recipe. To create a challenging benchmark, we
intentionally include a broad range of realistic user errors. Prior to each recording session, participants
are coached on common mistake types using practice recipes that differ from the one being filmed.
We then run brief mock recording sessions, in which participants deliberately make mistakes and
receive targeted feedback on the plausibility and naturalness of those mistakes. Finally, after each
session, every video is manually inspected to ensure quality and realism.

Annotation and Verification. EGO-MC-BENCH features manually generated variants of everyday

recipes, deliberately limiting the influence of prior knowledge so that evaluation emphasizes visual

reasoning. The annotations in our EGO-MC-BENCH benchmark consist of instructions and feedbacks,

provided by the instructor to the participant as described above. The voice recordings are transcribed

and then manually verified by an independent annotator to ensure accuracy. Additionally, the

annotators are tasked with classifying the transcripts into instructions or feedbacks.

Benchmark statistics. The benchmark contains                                      Feedback Distribution
∼10 hours of video data across 40 recording ses- 35
                                                                                               36.1%

sions. It features 7 participants in total and includes 30

diverse kitchen setups (Fig. 1). It covers 559 recipe 25 23.9%
steps (across the 40 recording sessions) and 395 feed-  Percentage (%)
back messages corresponding to mistakes made by 20                                                                       18.8%

the participants (954 feedbacks in total). This also 15                           11.9%

includes 22 clarification questions asked by the par- 10                                               9.3%

ticipants and subsequent clarifications provided by                     5
the instructor, along with 30 user comments usually
acknowledging instructions or indicating preferences.                   0 Technique Preparation Measurement Temperature  Timing
                                                                           Error  Error  Error         Error             Error
EGO-MC-BENCH includes two timing-based feed-                                             Mistake Type
back types: anticipatory feedback, given when a mis-
take is imminent (e.g., warning a user not to add too   Figure 3: Distribution of feedbacks in EGO-
                                                        MC-BENCH using classification of [30].

much salt before they pour), and post-error feedback, given after a mistake has occurred when it could

not have been anticipated (e.g., noticing that onions have already started to burn and advising the

user to lower the heat). Irrecoverable mistakes appear only in the anticipatory setting, since once they

occur, successful task completion is impossible. EGO-MC-BENCH contains an approximately equal

number of mistakes for each type (49.2% vs 50.8%). This is very different from QICD [5] where

all feedbacks are post-error. To further highlight the diversity of mistakes in the EGO-MC-BENCH

benchmark, we additionally include an analysis of the types of mistakes, using the classification

scheme from CaptainCook4D [30] in Fig. 3.

                                           4
                      Figure 4: Counterfactual mistake annotation in EGO-COMIST.

Qualitative examples. We show qualitative examples from EGO-MC-BENCH in Fig. 1. In the top
row, the assistant instructs the participant to add two teaspoons of salt; when only one is added,
it intervenes with corrective feedback, after which the participant completes the step and receives
confirmation. In the bottom row, the assistant instructs the participant to halve an apple and slice
half of it thinly; it first corrects slice thickness and then the sliced quantity before the participant
successfully completes the task. These examples illustrate the central challenge addressed by EGO-
MC-BENCH: providing timely, appropriate feedback as soon as a mistake becomes apparent.

4 EGO-COMIST: Synthetic Counterfactual Mistakes

As EGO-MC-BENCH evaluates models in a realistic fully interactive setting, it serves as a gold-
standard benchmark for studying training methods and datasets. It’s stringent downstream evaluation
also enables more exploratory data generation, including (noisy) synthetic data, since any drawback or
benefit is directly reflected in task performance. Here, we introduce Qualcomm Interactive Cooking:
EGO-COMIST, a counterfactual dataset of interactive instruction–feedback pairs. Built from existing
non-interactive datasets [14, 20, 30], it approximates the EGO-MC-BENCH setting by providing
feedback at the earliest point a mistake becomes apparent. Given a video clip of a recipe step, EGO-
COMIST consists of two stages: (i) generating a counterfactual step with corresponding instruction
and feedback, and (ii) inferring the timestamp at which the feedback should be delivered.

4.1 Stage 1: Counterfactual Instruction and Feedback Generation

In the first stage, we synthesize counterfactual variants of each recipe step by perturbing specific
attributes: ingredient quantity (measurement errors), preparation method (preparation errors), cooking
technique (technique errors), duration (timing errors), and temperature/heat setting (temperature
errors). Together, these categories capture the vast majority of common cooking mistakes [30]. To
this end, we extract the relevant attributes from the recipe step, i.e., quantity, cooking technique,
preparation method, cooking time and cooking temperature, using a state of the art LLM (Gemini-
2.5-Pro [38]). We then generate the corresponding counterfactual attribute, e.g., a counterfactual
measurement, preparation method, cooking technique, heat setting or cooking time. Finally, given
the original recipe step and the counterfactual attribute, we generate a counterfactual instruction and
feedback pair. Next we describe this process in detail for the measurement error type and provide
details of the remaining error types and prompts used in the appendix.

Measurement error. Given a recipe step that requires a specific quantity of an ingredient(s), e.g.,
Measure 4 tablespoons of flour and add it to the mug, we first ask the model to extract the specific
quantity (i.e., 4 tablespoons) and the corresponding ingredient (i.e., flour). Next, we ask the model
to create a counterfactual quantity, that is reasonable for the given recipe step. In Fig. 4, the
model chooses 3 tablespoons as the counterfactual quantity. Then, given the original quantity and

                                                           5
the counterfactual quantity, we ask the model to generate a new counterfactual instruction, i.e.,
Measure 3 tablespoons of flour and add it to the mug. This allows us now to construct the feedback
corresponding to this counterfactual instruction: Don’t add 4 tablespoons of flour, you need to add
only 3. Additionally, to keep the dataset balanced, we generate an equal number of counterfactual
instructions with smaller and larger measurements.

4.2 Stage 2: Counterfactual Feedback Timestamp Inference

At the second stage, we identify the appropriate timestamp for intervention and generate the cor-
responding (counterfactual) feedback. We first obtain step-by-step narrations of the input video
clip. Given the original recipe step, the counterfactual recipe step, and the narration, we use a
state-of-the-art LLM (Gemini-2.5-Pro) to infer when the feedback should be provided. This strategy
is effective because the feedback timestamp is generated in an oracle setup, where the LLM has
access to the counterfactual mistake and the step by step descriptions of the entire video clip, both of
which are not available at inference time.

Step-by-step descriptions. To localize the intervention time, we require detailed, temporally aligned
narrations focused on the user’s actions. When such descriptions are not already available in the
dataset we generate them using a state-of-the-art video LLM (Qwen3-VL-32B-Instruct [13]) using a
sliding-window approach that prompts the video LLM to describe overlapping video chunks (10 sec
windows with 5 sec stride). We instruct the model to focus on hand–object interactions, which are
critical for identifying errors, e.g., detecting when the user begins adding an extra tablespoon of flour.
Given these narrations, we infer the appropriate feedback timestamp using a state-of-the-art LLM.
We next describe this process for the measurement error type and provide details of the remaining
error types in the appendix.

Measurement error. When the counterfactual measurement is smaller than the original quantity in
the recipe step, we prompt the model to find the timestamped description at which it becomes clear
that the person intends to use more than the counterfactual amount. For example, in Fig. 4, we ask the
model to identify when the person is about to add a fourth tablespoon of flour, and use that timestamp
for counterfactual feedback. When the counterfactual quantity is larger than the original quantity, we
instead wait until it becomes clear that the person does not intend to add any more of the ingredient.

4.3 EGO-COMIST: Statistics and Human Evaluation

Using the pipeline described above we generate counterfactual mistakes for the following existing

cooking datasets: CaptainCook4D [30], Ego4D [19] and Ego-Exo4D [20]. As CaptainCook4D

already contains mistakes we use the recipe steps in CaptainCook4D without mistakes in our EGO-

COMIST pipeline. In case of Ego4D and Ego-Exo4D, we leverage the Goal-Step [34] and key step

annotations, respectively, to filter for appropriate videos containing cooking activities. We use these

annotations to obtain video descriptions and leverage them to generate instructions. However, these

descriptions are less detailed compared to CaptainCook4D and do not usually mention details like

cooking temperature, measurement or duration. We therefore only generate preparation and technique

errors from these datasets. Overall, EGO-COMIST contains 4969, 13847, 6271 instruction-feedback

pairs from CaptainCook4D, Ego4D and Ego-Exo4D respectively.          Feedback  Timestamp Errors

Finally, we perform a user study of the quality of   -10 sec 9.5%                         65.0%

the annotations in EGO-COMIST. We randomly
select 500 samples and first ask users to check if (-10,-7.5] sec 1.2%
the example is valid. An example is invalid if the (-7.5,-5.0] sec 2.4%
counterfactual instruction: 1. is not semantically (-5.0,-2.5] sec 4.0%
different from the action in the clip, or, 2. is not (-2.5,2.5) sec
feasible with the current ingredients, or, 3. does [2.5,5.0) sec 5.7%
not belong to the annotated mistake type. The [5.0,7.5) sec 3.6%
users found 87.1% of instruction-feedback pairs [7.5,10.0) sec 3.1%
                                                     ≥ 10 sec 5.5%
to be valid. Next, we asked them to find the appro-

priate time to provide the feedback, using the same                  0 20 40 60 80
criterion as for EGO-MC-BENCH. Fig. 5 shows
                                                                          % of Valid Responses

the resulting distribution of errors between the an- Figure 5: EGO-COMIST: Analysis of errors in

notated feedback timestamp and the timestamp timestamp inference (stage 2).

6
Table 2: Evaluation on the EGO-MC-BENCH, using the regular interval prompting strategy of [5].

                       Instruction                      Mistake

Method                 IC-Acc↑ Prec.↑ Rec.↑             F1↑      BERT↑ ROUGE-L↑

                                    Per-recipe step

InternVL3.5-38B [40]   3.9          0.00          0.00  0.00     0.000  0.000
Qwen2.5-VL-32B [15]
Qwen3-VL-8B [13]       27.3         0.00          0.00  0.00     0.000  0.000
VideoLLaMA3-7B [49]
Qwen3.5-2B [31]        30.7         0.00          0.00  0.00     0.000  0.000
Qwen3.5-9B [31]
Qwen3.5-27B [31]       31.8         0.00          0.00  0.00     0.000  0.000
Qwen3-VL-32B [13]
                       0.0          0.02          0.29  0.04     0.184  0.130

                       6.1          0.07          0.33  0.11     0.201  0.137

                       45.5         0.12          0.17  0.14     0.206  0.137

                       6.8          0.10          0.34  0.16     0.068  0.092

Videollm-online [6]    2.7          0.02          0.38  0.05     0.265  0.201
LiveCC [7]
                       1.6          0.03          0.43  0.06     0.248  0.196

Gemini-2.5-Flash [36]  24.6         0.17          0.20  0.18     0.180  0.135
Gemini-3-Flash [9]
                       32.7         0.18          0.18  0.18     0.126  0.102

                                    Full recipes

Qwen3.5-27B [31]       30.3         0.05          0.13  0.07     0.201  0.136
Qwen3-VL-32B [13]
                       6.8          0.04          0.28  0.07     0.061  0.090

Gemini-3-Flash [9]     10.6         0.05          0.20  0.08     0.097  0.091

provided by the participants. We see that most predictions (∼ 65%) are near-correct with error within
(−2.5, 2.5) sec. Extreme deviations (≥ 10 sec) remain a minority. Both “on time” annotations and
annotations close to being on time (< 10 sec) provide useful training signals.

5 Experiments

In this section, we first evaluate state of the art video LLMs on our EGO-MC-BENCH benchmark
and highlight challenges in live intervention in video streams. Subsequently, we finetune on synthetic
counterfactual data from EGO-COMIST and show that it improves performance on EGO-MC-BENCH.

Evaluation metrics. We metrics based on QICD [5]: instruction completion accuracy (IC-Acc),
mistake intervention (precision, recall, F1), and fluency (BERTScore, ROUGE-L). IC-Acc measures
whether the model correctly identifies completed instructions; mistake intervention measures temporal
alignment with ground-truth feedback; and fluency measures similarity to the reference feedback.
Fluency is only directly comparable across models with similar mistake-intervention performance.

Evaluation protocol. We consider two evaluation protocols: (i) per-recipe step, (ii) full recipe
step [5]. In the per-recipe step evaluation setup, the model is provided with an instruction corre-
sponding to a single recipe step, e.g., Take a large pan and add four tablespoons of olive oil. as
shown in Fig. 6, and the corresponding streaming video starting at the point where the instruction
was provided in the groundtruth data. The task now is to provide appropriate feedbacks until the
person successfully completes the recipe step. For the next recipe step, the input streaming video is
re-started from the groundtruth recipe step start timestamp. In the full recipe protocol, the video is
streamed continuously. However, this setup assumes that the user would move on to the next recipe
step even when the model fails to generate a success confirmation message for the current step, which
is unlikely in a real-world reactive setting (unlike the non-reactive setup of the Qualcomm Interactive
Cooking Dataset [5]).

Evaluation of “turn-based” models. We begin by evaluating state of the art “turn-based” video
LLMs on our EGO-MC-BENCH (Tab. 2): VideoLLaMA3-7B [49], Qwen2.5-VL-Instruct [15],
Qwen3-VL-Instruct [13], Qwen3.5 [31] and Gemini-Flash [9, 38]. These are not streaming models
and they only respond when prompted. We therefore adopt the regular-interval prompting protocol [5]
for streaming evaluation, querying step completion and mistake intervention at fixed time intervals (a
similar prompting strategy [33] has recently shown state of the art performance on streaming QA
benchmarks [23, 24]). We also consider the narration models: Videollm-online [6] and LiveCC [7].

                                                           7
Table 3: Evaluation on our EGO-MC-BENCH. For the Qwen3-VL/3.5 models, we specify the dataset
used for fine-tuning in brackets.

                            Instruction                      Mistake

Method                      IC-Acc↑ Prec.↑ Rec.↑             F1↑ BERT↑ ROUGE-L↑

                                  Per-recipe step

ProAssist [51]              3.0          0.31          0.09  0.14     0.281  0.173
                                                                             0.218
Qwen3.5-2B (QICD)           28.9         0.75          0.05  0.10     0.359  0.229
                                                                             0.219
Qwen3.5-2B (EGO-COMIST)     36.1         0.34          0.11  0.12     0.359  0.183
                                                                             0.272
Qwen3-VL-2B (EGO-COMIST+)   30.4         0.40          0.10  0.16     0.335

Qwen3.5-0.8B (EGO-COMIST+)  30.5         0.29          0.03  0.06     0.339

Qwen3.5-2B (EGO-COMIST+)    37.1         0.39          0.14  0.20     0.444

                                         Full recipes

ProAssist [51]              0.2          0.00          0.00  0.00     0.000  0.000
Qwen3.5-2B (QICD)                                                            0.161
Qwen3.5-2B (EGO-COMIST+)    8.2          0.18          0.04  0.06     0.347  0.278

                            19.7         0.30          0.08  0.13     0.433

We convert their generated narrations into interactive feedback by passing them to a helper LLM
(Qwen3-32B [12]) that produces timely intervention messages (see appendix).

The results in Tab. 2, highlight that our EGO-MC-BENCH is highly challenging even for state of the
art proprietary video LLMs such as Gemini-3-Flash. The mistake intervention F1 score remains low
at 0.18 in the per-recipe step setting and importantly, the provided feedbacks are of limited utility
as they do not match the ground truth feedbacks closely as evidenced by the BERT and ROUGE-L
metrics. This is further highlighted in Fig. 6, which shows the feedbacks provided by Gemini-3-Flash
given the instruction: Take a large pan and add four tablespoons of olive oil. The first feedback by
Gemini-3-Flash asks the user to use a tablespoon to measure not a measuring cup, but the person
has just taken out a tablespoon to measure. Afterwards, when the person sets the bottle of olive oil
aside after adding just a single tablespoon of olive oil, Gemini-3-Flash assumes that the person has
already completed the provided instruction. Of the open-weights models in Tab. 2, the Qwen3.5
series of models performs best especially in the mistake intervention and fluency metrics. However,
some models such as InternVL3.5-38B, Qwen2.5-VL-32B, Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct, VideoLLaMA3-
7B show poor mistake intervention performance. This is because they are unable to follow the
mistake intervention instruction, likely because these models are designed for “turn-based” question-
answering tasks (see appendix). The streaming Videollm-online and LiveCC models perform poorly
as they do not produce informative narrations at the right time to be useful for intervention mistakes.
Finally, the performance in the full-recipe step setting is even weaker overall, with Gemini-3-Flash
achieving the best mistake intervention performance and Qwen3.5-27B performing the best in the
IC-Acc metric.

Evaluation of “streaming” video LLMs. Next, we evaluate streaming models that can provide
interactive responses. To this end, we use our EGO-COMIST dataset to fine-tune the Qwen3.5-2B,
Qwen3.5-0.8B and Qwen3-VL-2B-Instruct [13] models. To enable interactive responses using the
“turn-based” Qwen models, we attach an action head on the last transformer block of these models.
The action head predicts a binary speak/stay silent action after every input frame (i.e., after the
<|vision_end|> token) [5, 6, 29]. We also compare to the state of the art ProAssist [51] model
which is trained on conversational data in the cooking domain.

We report the baselines in Tab. 3. The ProAssist model struggles to identify successful completion of
instructions and provide fluent feedbacks. The Qwen3.5-2B model fine-tuned on our EGO-COMIST
dataset performs better on all metrics. To highlight the effectiveness of our EGO-COMIST dataset,
we consider an ablation where the Qwen3.5-2B model is finetuned instead on the QICD [5] dataset.
We see significant degradation of mistake intervention performance. This is to be expected as in
QICD feedbacks are provided post-error and the participants are non-reactive. Interestingly, we find
that mixing QICD together with our EGO-COMIST dataset (EGO-COMIST+ in Tab. 3) improves
performance. This occurs only when we explicitly specify the qualitative difference in intervention
strategies in the model prompt, leading to a multi-task learning setup. The Qwen3.5-2B and Qwen3-
VL-2B models trained on EGO-COMIST+ outperform both ProAssist and Qwen3.5-2B (trained only

                                                           8
                             Instruction: Take a large pan and add four tablespoons of olive oil.

     [User gets tablespoon]  [User adds one tablespoon of olive  [User sets olive oil bottle aside]  [User adds the remaining three
Grouthtruth                              oil to the pan]                                                tablespoons of olive oil]

                                                                  Feedback: That's too little.       Success: Good job!
                                                                 Add more oil until the bottom
                                                                  is well coated. That is about

                                                                        four tablespoons.

Gemini-3-Flash                Feedback: You should use a         Success: Good job!
                             tablespoon to measure the oil
                              instead of a measuring cup.

 Qwen3.5-2B                                                        Feedback: The recipe calls        Success: Good job!
(Ego-CoMist+)                                                     for 4 tablespoons of olive oil,
                                                                 but you only used 1 tablespoon.

Figure 6: EGO-MC-BENCH streaming interventions: Gemini-3-Flash [9] produces incorrect feed-
backs and is unable to intervene when the person adds only one tablespoon of olive oil. The
Qwen3.5-2B model finetuned on EGO-COMIST+ intervenes at the appropriate time.

on QICD), again highlighting the effectiveness of our EGO-COMIST dataset. Note that, the Qwen3.5-
2B without fine-tuning on EGO-COMIST+ performs very poorly as shown in Tab. 2. Finetuning on
EGO-COMIST+ significantly improves its IC-Acc from 0.0 to 33.0 and mistake F1 from 0.04 to 0.18
and enables the model to react interactively to the input video stream – matching performance of the
proprietary Gemini-3-Flash model.

In the full recipe evaluation setup, the performance of ProAssist is very weak: this is because as in the
per-recipe step scenario, the model is unable to predict successful completion of recipe steps in the
reactive setup of EGO-MC-BENCH. Moreover, unlike in the per-recipe step setup in the full-recipe
setup errors accumulate over recipe steps, leading to poor performance. Finally, we again see that
training on our EGO-COMIST dataset leads to significant improvement over training just on QICD.

6 Conclusion

We introduced Qualcomm Interactive Cooking: EGO-MC-BENCH, a benchmark that addresses a key
gap in interactive step-by-step task guidance: the evaluation of video LLMs in reactive assistant–user
interactions. We further proposed Qualcomm Interactive Cooking: EGO-COMIST, a counterfactual
synthetic dataset by converting non-interactive cooking clips into supervised instances of proactive
intervention, providing both counterfactual instructions and precisely timed feedback signals. Our
evaluation shows that EGO-MC-BENCH is challenging for state-of-the-art MLLMs: off-the-shelf
models struggle to detect mistakes and to time interventions correctly. Fine-tuning with EGO-COMIST
consistently improves mistake detection, intervention timing, and instruction-completion accuracy.

Limitations and Broader Impacts. Our work is focused on the cooking domain through EGO-
MC-BENCH and EGO-COMIST. While we show that fine-tuning models on EGO-COMIST leads
to improved performance, these models are still far away from real-world deployment. Also, video
LLMs can produce harmful and biased content, make incorrect claims and produce wrongful advice.
This needs to be taken into account when interacting with, deploying or building on these models. It
also has to be taken into account that any computer vision model processing visual information about
human activities could in principle extract information beyond what is required for the use-case.

                                                           9
References

 [1] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni
      Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4
      technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

 [2] Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson,
      Karel Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, Roman Ring, Eliza
      Rutherford, Serkan Cabi, Tengda Han, Zhitao Gong, Sina Samangooei, Marianne Monteiro,
      Jacob Menick, Sebastian Borgeaud, Andrew Brock, Aida Nematzadeh, Sahand Sharifzadeh,
      Mikolaj Binkowski, Ricardo Barreira, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Zisserman, and Karen Simonyan.
      Flamingo: a visual language model for few-shot learning. In NeurIPS, 2022.

 [3] Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Shusheng Yang, Shijie Wang, Sinan Tan, Peng Wang, Junyang Lin, Chang
      Zhou, and Jingren Zhou. Qwen-vl: A versatile vision-language model for understanding,
      localization. Text Reading, and Beyond, 2, 2023.

 [4] Yuwei Bao, Keunwoo Peter Yu, Yichi Zhang, Shane Storks, Itamar Bar-Yossef, Alexander
      De La Iglesia, Megan Su, Xiao-Lin Zheng, and Joyce Chai. Can foundation models watch, talk
      and guide you step by step to make a cake? In EMNLP Findings, 2023.

 [5] Apratim Bhattacharyya, Bicheng Xu, Sanjay Haresh, Reza Pourreza, Litian Liu, Sunny Panchal,
      Pulkit Madan, Leonid Sigal, and Roland Memisevic. Can multi-modal llms provide live
      step-by-step task guidance? In NeurIPS, 2025.

 [6] Joya Chen, Zhaoyang Lv, Shiwei Wu, Kevin Qinghong Lin, Chenan Song, Difei Gao, Jia-Wei
      Liu, Ziteng Gao, Dongxing Mao, and Mike Zheng Shou. Videollm-online: Online video large
      language model for streaming video. In CVPR, 2024.

 [7] Joya Chen, Ziyun Zeng, Yiqi Lin, Wei Li, Zejun Ma, and Mike Zheng Shou. Livecc: Learning
      video llm with streaming speech transcription at scale. In CVPR, 2025.

 [8] Dima Damen, Hazel Doughty, Giovanni Maria Farinella, Antonino Furnari, Jian Ma, Evangelos
      Kazakos, Davide Moltisanti, Jonathan Munro, Toby Perrett, Will Price, and Michael Wray.
      Rescaling egocentric vision: Collection, pipeline and challenges for epic-kitchens-100. In IJCV,
      2022.

 [9] Google Deepmind. “Gemini 3 Flash.”. https://deepmind.google/models/gemini/
      flash/, 2025. [Online; accessed May-2026].

[10] Shangzhe Di, Zhelun Yu, Guanghao Zhang, Haoyuan Li, Hao Cheng, Bolin Li, Wanggui He,
      Fangxun Shu, Hao Jiang, et al. Streaming video question-answering with in-context video
      kv-cache retrieval. In ICLR, 2025.

[11] Xin Ding, Hao Wu, Yifan Yang, Shiqi Jiang, Donglin Bai, Zhibo Chen, and Ting Cao. Stream-
      mind: Unlocking full frame rate streaming video dialogue through event-gated cognition. CoRR,
      abs/2503.06220, 2025.

[12] An Yang et al. Qwen3 technical report. CoRR, abs/2505.09388, 2025.

[13] Bai et. al. Qwen3-vl technical report. CoRR, abs/2511.21631, 2025.

[14] Grauman et. al. Ego4d: Around the world in 3,000 hours of egocentric video. In CVPR, 2022.

[15] Shuai Bai et. al. Qwen2.5-vl technical report. CoRR, abs/2502.13923, 2025.

[16] Chaoyou Fu, Yuhan Dai, Yongdong Luo, Lei Li, Shuhuai Ren, Renrui Zhang, Zihan Wang,
      Chenyu Zhou, Yunhang Shen, Mengdan Zhang, et al. Video-mme: The first-ever comprehensive
      evaluation benchmark of multi-modal llms in video analysis. In CVPR, 2025.

[17] Shenghao Fu, Qize Yang, Yuan-Ming Li, Yi-Xing Peng, Kun-Yu Lin, Xihan Wei, Jian-Fang Hu,
      Xiaohua Xie, and Wei-Shi Zheng. Vispeak: Visual instruction feedback in streaming videos. In
      ICCV, 2025.

                                                          10
[18] Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian,
      Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, et al. The llama
      3 herd of models. CoRR, abs/2407.21783, 2024.

[19] Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Rohit
      Girdhar, Jackson Hamburger, Hao Jiang, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, Miguel Martin, Tushar Nagara-
      jan, Ilija Radosavovic, Santhosh Kumar Ramakrishnan, Fiona Ryan, Jayant Sharma, Michael
      Wray, Mengmeng Xu, Eric Zhongcong Xu, Chen Zhao, Siddhant Bansal, et al. Ego4d: Around
      the world in 3, 000 hours of egocentric video. In CVPR, 2022.

[20] Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Lorenzo Torresani, Kris Kitani, Jitendra Malik, Tri-
      antafyllos Afouras, Kumar Ashutosh, Vijay Baiyya, Siddhant Bansal, Bikram Boote, et al.
      Ego-exo4d: Understanding skilled human activity from first- and third-person perspectives.
      CoRR, abs/2311.18259, 2023.

[21] Kairui Hu, Penghao Wu, Fanyi Pu, Wang Xiao, Yuanhan Zhang, Xiang Yue, Bo Li, and Ziwei
      Liu. Video-mmmu: Evaluating knowledge acquisition from multi-discipline professional videos.
      CoRR, abs/2501.13826, 2025.

[22] Wei Li, Bing Hu, Rui Shao, Leyang Shen, and Liqiang Nie. LION-FS: fast & slow video-
      language thinker as online video assistant. In CVPR, 2025.

[23] Yifei Li, Junbo Niu, Ziyang Miao, Chunjiang Ge, Yuanhang Zhou, Qihao He, Xiaoyi Dong,
      Haodong Duan, Shuangrui Ding, Rui Qian, et al. Ovo-bench: How far is your video-llms from
      real-world online video understanding? CoRR, abs/2501.05510, 2025.

[24] Junming Lin, Zheng Fang, Chi Chen, Zihao Wan, Fuwen Luo, Peng Li, Yang Liu, and Maosong
      Sun. Streamingbench: Assessing the gap for mllms to achieve streaming video understanding.
      CoRR, abs/2411.03628, 2024.

[25] Antoine Miech, Dimitri Zhukov, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Makarand Tapaswi, Ivan Laptev, and
      Josef Sivic. Howto100m: Learning a text-video embedding by watching hundred million
      narrated video clips. In ICCV, 2019.

[26] Zhenyu Ning, Guangda Liu, Qihao Jin, Wenchao Ding, Minyi Guo, and Jieru Zhao. Livevlm:
      Efficient online video understanding via streaming-oriented KV cache and retrieval. CoRR,
      abs/2505.15269, 2025.

[27] OpenAI. “Introducing GPT-5.2.”. https://openai.com/index/introducing-gpt-5-2/,
      2025. [Online; accessed March-2025].

[28] Sunny Panchal, Apratim Bhattacharyya, Guillaume Berger, Antoine Mercier, Cornelius Böhm,
      Florian Dietrichkeit, Reza Pourreza, Xuanlin Li, Pulkit Madan, Mingu Lee, Mark Todorovich,
      Ingo Bax, and Roland Memisevic. What to say and when to say it: Live fitness coaching as a
      testbed for situated interaction. In NeurIPS, 2024.

[29] Sunny Panchal, Apratim Bhattacharyya, Guillaume Berger, Antoine Mercier, Cornelius Bohm,
      Florian Dietrichkeit, Reza Pourreza, Xuanlin Li, Pulkit Madan, Mingu Lee, Mark Todorovich,
      Ingo Bax, and Roland Memisevic. What to say and when to say it: Live fitness coaching as a
      testbed for situated interaction. In NeurIPS, 2024.

[30] Rohith Peddi, Shivvrat Arya, Bharath Challa, Likhitha Pallapothula, Akshay Vyas, Bhavya
      Gouripeddi, Qifan Zhang, Jikai Wang, Vasundhara Komaragiri, Eric D. Ragan, Nicholas Ruozzi,
      Yu Xiang, and Vibhav Gogate. Captaincook4d: A dataset for understanding errors in procedural
      activities. In NeurIPS, 2024.

[31] QwenTeam. “Qwen3.5: Towards Native Multimodal Agents.”. https://qwen.ai/blog?id=
      qwen3.5, 2026. [Online; accessed May-2026].

[32] Fadime Sener, Dibyadip Chatterjee, Daniel Shelepov, Kun He, Dipika Singhania, Robert Wang,
      and Angela Yao. Assembly101: A large-scale multi-view video dataset for understanding
      procedural activities. In CVPR, 2022.

                                                          11
[33] Yujiao Shen, Shulin Tian, Jingkang Yang, and Ziwei Liu. A simple baseline for streaming video
      understanding. CoRR, abs/2604.02317, 2026.

[34] Yale Song, Eugene Byrne, Tushar Nagarajan, Huiyu Wang, Miguel Martin, and Lorenzo
      Torresani. Ego4d goal-step: Toward hierarchical understanding of procedural activities. In
      NeurIPS, 2023.

[35] Yansong Tang, Dajun Ding, Yongming Rao, Yu Zheng, Danyang Zhang, Lili Zhao, Jiwen Lu,
      and Jie Zhou. COIN: A large-scale dataset for comprehensive instructional video analysis. In
      CVPR, 2019.

[36] Gemini Team. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long
      context, and next generation agentic capabilities. CoRR, abs/2507.06261, 2025.

[37] Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu,
      Radu Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, et al. Gemini: A family of highly
      capable multimodal models. CoRR, abs/2312.11805, 2023.

[38] Gemini Team, Petko Georgiev, Ving Ian Lei, Ryan Burnell, Libin Bai, Anmol Gulati, Garrett
      Tanzer, Damien Vincent, Zhufeng Pan, Shibo Wang, et al. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal
      understanding across millions of tokens of context. CoRR, abs/2403.05530, 2024.

[39] Peng Wang, Shuai Bai, Sinan Tan, Shijie Wang, Zhihao Fan, Jinze Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing
      Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, Yang Fan, Kai Dang, Mengfei Du, Xuancheng Ren, Rui Men,
      Dayiheng Liu, Chang Zhou, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. Qwen2-vl: Enhancing vision-
      language model’s perception of the world at any resolution. CoRR, abs/2409.12191, 2024.

[40] Weiyun Wang, Zhangwei Gao, Lixin Gu, Hengjun Pu, Long Cui, Xingguang Wei, Zhaoyang Liu,
      Linglin Jing, Shenglong Ye, Jie Shao, et al. Internvl3.5: Advancing open-source multimodal
      models in versatility, reasoning, and efficiency. CoRR, abs/2508.18265, 2025.

[41] Xin Wang, Taein Kwon, Mahdi Rad, Bowen Pan, Ishani Chakraborty, Sean Andrist, Dan Bohus,
      Ashley Feniello, Bugra Tekin, Felipe Vieira Frujeri, Neel Joshi, and Marc Pollefeys. Holoassist:
      an egocentric human interaction dataset for interactive AI assistants in the real world. In ICCV,
      2023.

[42] Yuxuan Wang, Yueqian Wang, Bo Chen, Tong Wu, Dongyan Zhao, and Zilong Zheng. Om-
      nimmi: A comprehensive multi-modal interaction benchmark in streaming video contexts,
      2025.

[43] Zeqing Wang, Wentao Wan, Qiqing Lao, Runmeng Chen, Minjie Lang, Xiao Wang, Keze Wang,
      and Liang Lin. Towards top-down reasoning: An explainable multi-agent approach for visual
      question answering. CoRR, abs/2311.17331, 2025.

[44] Haoning Wu, Dongxu Li, Bei Chen, and Junnan Li. Longvideobench: A benchmark for
      long-context interleaved video-language understanding. In NeurIPS, 2024.

[45] Jiaer Xia, Peixian Chen, Mengdan Zhang, Xing Sun, and Kaiyang Zhou. Streaming video
      instruction tuning. CoRR, abs/2512.21334, 2025.

[46] Jin Xu, Zhifang Guo, Hangrui Hu, Yunfei Chu, Xiong Wang, Jinzheng He, Yuxuan Wang, Xian
      Shi, Ting He, Xinfa Zhu, et al. Qwen3-omni technical report. CoRR, abs/2501.13826, 2025.

[47] Ruyi Xu, Guangxuan Xiao, Yukang Chen, Liuning He, Kelly Peng, Yao Lu, and Song Han.
      Streamingvlm: Real-time understanding for infinite video streams. CoRR, abs/2510.09608,
      2025.

[48] Zhenyu Yang, Yuhang Hu, Zemin Du, Dizhan Xue, Shengsheng Qian, Jiahong Wu, Fan
      Yang, Weiming Dong, and Changsheng Xu. Svbench: A benchmark with temporal multi-turn
      dialogues for streaming video understanding. CoRR, abs/2502.10810, 2025.

[49] Boqiang Zhang, Kehan Li, Zesen Cheng, Zhiqiang Hu, Yuqian Yuan, Guanzheng Chen, Sicong
      Leng, Yuming Jiang, Hang Zhang, Xin Li, Peng Jin, Wenqi Zhang, Fan Wang, Lidong Bing,
      and Deli Zhao. Videollama 3: Frontier multimodal foundation models for image and video
      understanding, 2025.

                                                          12
[50] Haoji Zhang, Yiqin Wang, Yansong Tang, Yong Liu, Jiashi Feng, Jifeng Dai, and Xiaojie
      Jin. Flash-vstream: Memory-based real-time understanding for long video streams. CoRR,
      abs/2406.08085, 2025.

[51] Yichi Zhang, Xin Luna Dong, Zhaojiang Lin, Andrea Madotto, Anuj Kumar, Babak Damavandi,
      Joyce Chai, and Seungwhan Moon. Proactive assistant dialogue generation from streaming
      egocentric videos. In EMNLP, 2025.

[52] Luowei Zhou, Chenliang Xu, and Jason Corso. Towards automatic learning of procedures from
      web instructional videos. In AAAI, 2018.

                                                          13
A Appendix

Here we provide: 1. Additional examples from our EGO-MC-BENCH benchmark. 2. Additional
qualitative examples from state of the art models on our EGO-MC-BENCH benchmark. 3. Additional
details of the evaluation of “turn-based” video LLMs. 4. Additional details of the evaluation of
streaming narration models. 5. Additional details of the evaluation metrics. 6. Additional training
details. 7. Additional details of the EGO-COMIST synthetic data generation pipeline. 8. Prompts
used at both stages of the EGO-COMIST synthetic data generation process.

B EGO-MC-BENCH: Additional Examples

We provide additional qualitative examples from our EGO-MC-BENCH benchmark in Fig. 7.
In the top row, the assistant first provides the instruction: Now, grab 2 tomatoes and dice them
into small cubes. The user then starts to dice the tomatoes, but make large cubes. So, the assistant
intervenes and provides the feedback: You need to dice the tomatoes in smaller cubes. The user then
dices the tomatoes correctly. But, instead of adding just two tomatoes, the user starts to dice a third
tomato. The assistant intervenes again and provides the feedback: You need to add only two tomatoes.
The user then puts the tomato back and the assistant acknowledges the successful completion of the
recipe step.
In the bottom row, the assistant first provides the instruction: Now cover each slice of bread with
shredded mozzarella cheese. The user then starts to add shredded mozzarella cheese to the slices
of bread. But the user stops after adding too little cheese. So, the assistant intervenes and provides
the feedback: That’s too little. You might want to add a little bit more to cover each slice. The user
then adds way too much cheese on one of the slices. The assistant intervenes again and provides the
feedback: Oh, that’s too much. You might need to take out some of the mozzarella from the toast that
has too much cheese. The user then re-distributes the cheese correctly and the assistant acknowledges
the successful completion of the recipe step.
These examples again highlight the core challenge of our EGO-MC-BENCH benchmark: intervention
by providing appropriate feedback as soon as a mistake becomes apparent, guiding the user towards
successful completion.

C EGO-MC-BENCH: Additional Qualitative Examples

In addition to Fig. 6 in the main paper, we show a qualitative example in Fig. 8 to highlight the
weak performance of state of the art video LLMs, e.g., Gemini-3-Flash [9]. The person is trying
to execute the instruction Take a bowl and put 3 tablespoons of sesame oil in it in Fig. 8. The first
feedback by Gemini-3-Flash asks the person to roll up their sleeves before starting to cook although
this is irrelevant for this recipe step. Next, Gemini-3-Flash asks the person to use a measuring spoon
even though the person is already using a measuring spoon. The Qwen3.5-VL model trained on our
EGO-COMIST+ dataset is able to correctly provide the feedback that the person should add three
tablespoons of sesame oil and not stop at two. Thus, successfully guiding the person to completion of
the recipe step.

D Additional Details: Evaluation of “Turn-Based” Models

As mentioned in the main paper, we use the regular interval prompting strategy [5] to evalu-
ate state of the art “turn-based” video LLMs which cannot respond interactively to video in-
put streams: VideoLLaMA3-7B [49], InternVL3.5-38B [40], Qwen2.5-VL-Instruct [15] series,
Qwen3-VL-Instruct [13] series, Qwen3.5 [31] series, and Gemini-Flash [38, 9]. We use a time-
interval of 5 seconds [5] to balance accuracy and inference speed. At every turn we first prompt the
video LLM to check if the person has completed the current recipe step:

                                                          14
Tofu Curry

Instruction: Now, grab 2 tomatoes  [User dices tomatoes            Feedback: You need to dice the
  and dice them into small cubes.     into big cubes]                 tomatoes in smaller cubes.

[User dices tomatoes into          Feedback: You need to add only        Success: Good job!
  cubes of correct size]                      two tomatoes.

  Pizza Toast

Instruction: Now cover each slice  [User starts to add              Feedback: That's too little. You
       of bread with shredded      mozzarella cheese]              might want to add a little bit more
         mozzarella cheese.
                                                                            to cover each slice.

 [User adds more            Feedback: Oh, that's too much. You might     Success: Good job!
mozzarella cheese]         need to take out some of the mozzarella from

                                 the toast that has too much cheese.

Figure 7: Our EGO-MC-BENCH benchmark includes interventions with appropriate feedback
whenever a mistake is detected, guiding the user towards successful goal completion across recipe
steps.

Check if Recipe Step Complete
You are an expert cooking assistant who is observing a person cook.
##INSTRUCTIONS:
The person is currently at the following recipe step: [recipe_step]. Has the person already
completed the recipe step? If the person has completed the recipe step answer ‘YES’ else
answer ‘NO’. If you answer ‘YES’ describe why you think the person already completed the
recipe step.

                                                      15
                                Instruction: Take a bowl and put 3 tablespoons of sesame oil in it.

[User adds first tablespoon of  [User adds seconds tablespoon of  [User stops adding sesame oil]     [User adds third tablespoon of
           sesame oil]                       sesame oil]                                                        sesame oil]

Grouthtruth                                                       Feedback: You should use 3         Success: Good job!
                                                                   tablespoons of sesame oil

Gemini-3-Flash  Feedback: You should roll up                        Feedback: You're not using a     Success: Good job!
                   your sleeves before you                        measuring spoon to measure the
                          start cooking                            sesame oil; instead, you're just

                                                                      pouring it into the bowl.

 Qwen3.5-2B                                                            Feedback: You used 2          Success: Good job!
(Ego-CoMist+)                                                     teaspoons of sesame oil, but the

                                                                    recipe actually called for 3.

Figure 8: Additional EGO-MC-BENCH streaming interventions: Gemini-3-Flash [9] produces
incorrect feedbacks and is unable to intervene when the person adds only two tablespoon of sesame
oil. The Qwen3.5-2B model trained on our EGO-COMIST+ dataset intervenes at the appropriate
time.

We found that asking the model to articulate why the recipe step is complete led to a boost in
performance across models. Furthermore, we did not find any significant change in performance for
alternate wordings of the prompt across models.

Now, if the model answers that the recipe step is not yet complete, we next ask the model to check if
the person has made a mistake. For Qwen3-VL-Instruct [13], Qwen3.5 [31] and Gemini-Flash [38, 9]
series, we use the following prompt which describes all mistake types in detail and also describes
how to detect and intervene these mistakes. Also, in order to make sure that the video LLM does not
repeat feedback for the same mistake again and again (as the past video frames are available in the
context window), we store recently generated feedbacks (of the last 1 minute) in an array and ask the
video LLM not to repeat the same feedback. Note that, this prompt was designed iteratively, where
we added details until we saw no further improvements in performance.

    Check for Mistake

    You are an expert cooking assistant who is observing a person cook. You should look out for
    mistakes made by the person.

    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    The person is trying to complete the following recipe step: [recipe_step]. Your task is to check
    if the person is about to make or has already made a mistake. Mistakes occur when the person
    performs actions that deviates from the instruction and DIRECTLY INTERFERES WITH
    SUCCESSFUL INSTRUCTION COMPLETION. Do not penalize actions that do not directly
    interfere with instruction completion (e.g. washing broccoli before cutting, if the instruction
    just says ‘cut broccoli’).

                                                          16
    Here are some common types of mistakes that you should look out for: 1. Technique Error: A
    mistake in how a step is physically performed. Examples include chopping with the wrong
    motion, stirring when folding is required, or spilling during transfer, producing uneven cuts
    or texture issues even when tools and amounts are right. Ignore minor technique errors such
    as not holding or gripping objects properly, holding with a risk of dropping etc. that do not
    interfere directly with recipe completion.
    2. Preparation Error: A setup mistake before executing the step . Using the wrong or dirty uten-
    sil, not washing/peeling/draining ingredients, insufficient draining of fluid, cutting/chopping
    without peeling which makes correct execution difficult or unsafe.
    3. Measurement Error: An error in quantity — wrong counts, volumes, weights, or units.
    Mixing up teaspoons and tablespoons, misreading a scale, or miscounting items leads to off
    ratios and predictable taste or texture problems.
    4. Temperature Error: A mistake in heat level or thermal state — the applied temperature,
    starting temperature, or thermal transition is wrong. Not preheating, using the wrong mi-
    crowave power, overheating oil, or adding cold liquid when warm is required often causes
    burning, undercooking, or split emulsions.
    5. Timing Error: A mistake in duration – over- or under-doing a step or skipping required
    rests, proofs, or cooling periods. Overcooking, underblending, or cutting resting time short
    typically yields incorrect doneness or unstable textures.

    Do not repeat previously detected mistakes. Here are the feedbacks corresponding to previ-
    ously detected mistakes:[prev_detected_mistakes]. Assume the recipe step is still in progress.
    Your task is to identify any mistake that’s already visible in the partially completed step. Do
    no penalize partially competed recipe steps. If you observe a mistake answer ‘YES’, else
    ‘No’. Your response MUST BEGIN WITH ‘YES’ or ‘NO’. In case you answer ‘YES’, please
    follow with a concise feedback to the user describing the mistake (i.e. YES. <feedback>.).
    Directly address the person.

For the VideoLLaMA3-7B [49], InternVL3.5-38B [40], Qwen2.5-VL-Instruct [15] series, we used
the following simple prompt:

    Check for Mistake

    You are an expert cooking assistant who is observing a person cook. You should look out for
    mistakes made by the person.

    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    The person is trying to complete the following recipe step: [recipe_step]. Your task is to check
    if the person is about to make or has already made a mistake. Mistakes occur when the person
    performs actions that deviates from the instruction and DIRECTLY INTERFERES WITH
    SUCCESSFUL INSTRUCTION COMPLETION. Assume the recipe step is still in progress.
    Your task is to identify any mistake that’s already visible in the partially completed step.

    Do no penalize partially competed recipe steps. If you observe a mistake answer ‘YES’, else
    ‘No’. Your response MUST BEGIN WITH ‘YES’ or ‘NO’. In case you answer ‘YES’, please
    follow with a concise feedback to the user describing the mistake (i.e. YES. <feedback>.).
    Directly address the person.

As shown in Tab. 2, even with this simple prompt these models (almost) never predict that a mistake
has occurred. Adding the additional details as in the prompt for the Qwen3-VL-Instruct [13], and
Gemini-Flash [9, 38] series does not improve performance.

E Additional Details: Evaluation of Streaming Narration Models

As mentioned in the main paper, for streaming narration models such as Videollm-online [6] and
LiveCC [7], we convert their generated narrations into interactive feedback by passing them to a
helper LLM (Qwen3.5-27B [31]). Note that in case of LiveCC, it produces narrations after every
1 second of video. We store these narrations in a buffer ([narration_list]) and after every 5 seconds

                                                          17
(similar to the case of the “turn-based” video LLMs described above in Sec. D), we prompt the helper
Qwen3.3-27B [31] LLM as follows:

    Check if Recipe Step Complete (Streaming Narration Models)

    You are an intelligent chatbot that is judging another system which narrates human cooking
    videos. Given a high level action instruction and a list of narrations generated from the system,
    your job is to decide if the narration is correct and shows completion of the instruction.

    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    List of narrations: [narration_list]

    Answer ‘YES’ if the instruction is completed otherwise output ‘NO’.

If the helper LLM predicts that the instruction is not complete, we next ask the helper LLM to check
if the person has made a mistake (similar to the case of the “turn-based” video LLMs). We use the
simple prompt described in Sec. D used with the VideoLLaMA3-7B [49], InternVL3.5-38B [40],
Qwen2.5-VL-Instruct [15] series, Qwen3.5 [31] series models. But instead of the video we provide
the narrations from the streaming narration model as input. Adding additional details to the prompt
as for the Qwen3-VL-Instruct/Qwen3.5, and Gemini-Flash series does not improve performance.

F Additional Details: Evaluation Metrics

To compute the IC-Acc, mistake intervention and mistake fluency metrics, we use a temporal window
size of 30 seconds [5].
The mistake fluency scores are comparable only at the same mistake detection levels, because the
scores are computed only for true positives. If the true positive rate is low, then the model could get
higher scores by making a few very good predictions. But in practice, a model with a higher true
positive rate is preferred.

G Additional Training Details

As described in the main paper, we fine-tune the language backbone of the Qwen3-VL-2B-Instruct,
Qwen3.5-0.8B, Qwen3.5-2B models using LoRA (dim = 64) for ∼100k iterations (based on validation
loss). We use the AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 2 × 10−4 and a cosine annealing learning
rate schedule for 100k iterations until a learning rate of 1 × 10−6. We use a batch size of 32 using 8
Nvidia H100 GPUs (with 4 gradient accumulation steps). For all Qwen3-VL/3.5 models in Tab. 3
trained using EGO-COMIST+ data, we additionally train them on action segments from Ego4D
Goal-Step [34] to improve IC-Acc scores. We convert the leaf action descriptions in Ego4D Goal-
Step into instructions (using Qwen3-8B) and add success confirmation messages at the end of the
action. Overall composition of EGO-COMIST+ is 60% EGO-COMIST, 30% QICD, and 10% Ego4D
Goal-Step actions.

H EGO-COMIST: Data Generation Process

H.1 Stage 1: Counterfactual Instruction and Feedback Generation

Continuing from Sec. 4.1 in the main paper, we describe the stage 1 of the counterfactual data
generation pipeline for the preparation, technique, temperature and timing errors.
Preparation error. Given a recipe step which uses a specific preparation method on an ingredient or
item (object) used in the cooking process, we first ask the LLM to extract the preparation method and
the object. For example, given the instruction: Coat the 6 oz. ramekin cup with cooking spray, the
preparation method is coat with cooking spray and the object is the ramekin cup. Then, we ask the
LLM to propose an alternative preparation method that for the object that aligns with the original
recipe step. For example: coat with cooking spray can be replaced with grease with butter. Given
the original preparation method and the alternative preparation method, we can now generate the

                                                          18
counterfactual instruction and feedback messages: Grease the 6 oz. ramekin cup with butter and You
should grease the ramekin cup with butter, not coat with cooking spray.

Technique error. Similar to the counterfactual instruction and feedback generation process for
preparation errors described above, given a recipe step, we extract the specific cooking technique
used along with the ingredient or item (object) used in the specific technique. For example, given the
instruction: Cut the English muffin into two pieces with a knife, the technique is cut with a knife and
the object is the English muffin. Then, we ask the LLM to propose an alternative technique that aligns
with the original recipe step. For example: cut with a knife can be replaced with split with a fork.
Given, the original and the alternative technique, we can now generate the counterfactual instruction
and feedback messages: Split the English muffin into two pieces with a fork and Don’t use a knife to
cut the muffin, use a fork to split it instead.

Temperature error. Given a recipe step that involves cooking at a specific temperature, heat setting
or object at a thermal state (e.g., hot/cold), we ask the LLM to suggest an alternative reasonable
temperature, heat setting or a thermal state. For example, given the recipe step Microwave the plate,
covered, on high for 1.5 minutes, we can generate the counterfactual instruction: Microwave the plate,
covered, at medium heat for 1.5 minutes and the feedback: Be careful, this step calls for medium heat,
not high, to avoid overcooking.

Timing error. Given a recipe step that involves cooking for a specific duration, we ask the LLM to
suggest an alternative reasonable duration. For example, given the recipe step Microwave on high
for 30 seconds, we can generate the counterfactual instruction: Microwave on high for 45 seconds
and the feedback: You did not microwave for long enough. You should microwave on high for 45
seconds. Additionally, to keep the dataset balanced, we generate an equal number of counterfactual
instructions with shorter and longer durations.

H.2 Stage 2: Counterfactual Feedback Timestamp Inference

Continuing from Sec. 4.2 in the main paper, we describe the stage 2 of the counterfactual data
generation pipeline for the preparation, technique, temperature and timing errors.

Preparation error. In case of preparation errors, we prompt the LLM to find the timestamp at which
the person starts to use the incorrect preparation method. For example, if the original instruction was
Coat the 6 oz. ramekin cup with cooking spray and the counterfactual instruction is Grease the 6 oz.
ramekin cup with butter, we prompt the LLM to look for the description which states that the person
is starting to coat the ramekin cup with cooking spray. We use the timestamp of this description as
the counterfactual feedback timestamp.

Technique error. In case of technique errors, we prompt the LLM to find the timestamp where the
person starts to use the incorrect technique. For example, if the original instruction was Cut the
English muffin into two pieces with a knife and the counterfactual instruction is Split the English
muffin into two pieces with a fork, we prompt the LLM to find the description from the step by step
descriptions which states that the person starts to cut the english muffin into two pieces with a knife.
We use the timestamp of this description as the counterfactual feedback timestamp.

Temperature error. In case of temperature errors, we prompt the LLM to find the timestamp where it
becomes clear that the person has used the wrong heat setting. For example, if the original instruction
calls for microwaving at high heat and the counterfactual instruction calls for microwaving at medium
heat, we use the timestamp where the person sets the heat setting on the microwave.

Timing error. In case the counterfactual amount of time (y seconds) is smaller than the original
amount of time (x seconds) in the recipe step, we provide the feedback at least y seconds from when
the cooking process begins. For example, if the original recipe calls for microwaving for 45 seconds
and the counterfactual amount of time is 30 seconds, we wait at least 30 seconds from the beginning
of the microwaving process. In case the counterfactual amount of time is larger than the original
amount of time, we provide the feedback after the cooking process finishes, i.e., after x seconds from
the beginning of the cooking process.

                                                          19
I EGO-COMIST Prompts: Stage 1

Here we provide the prompts used in stage 1 (Counterfactual Instruction and Feedback Generation)
of the EGO-COMIST data generation pipeline.

I.1 Measurement error

As described in the main paper, given a recipe step: [org_recipe_step], we first ask the LLM to extract
the attributes: quantity [quantity] and the corresponding ingredient [ingredient].

    Extract Attributes from Recipe Step
    You are an expert cooking assistant. You are watching a person follow a step by step recipe.
    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    The person is following the recipe step: [org_recipe_step].
    Does this recipe step involve measuring a specific quantity or amount of an ingredient?
    Examples include specific quantities like teaspoon, teaspoons, tablespoons, liters, ounces,
    grams, kgs, kilograms, cups, pints, quarts, gallons etc.
    Extract the explicitly stated numerical quantity or amount and Answer ‘YES’ or ‘NO’.
    If ‘YES’, then return the specific quantity and ingredient. Return a dict with two fields:
   {‘ingredient’: .., ‘quantity’: ...}. DO NOT RETURN ANYTHING ELSE.

Then, we ask the LLM to create a counterfactual quantity [counterfactual_quantity], reasonable for
the given recipe step. We use different prompts for greater and smaller quantities, which ask the LLM
to generate greater or smaller counterfactual quantities respectively, as shown below.

    Counterfactual Attributes (Greater)
    You are an expert cooking assistant.
    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    The following recipe step: [org_recipe_step]; uses the following quantity: [quantity] of
    the item: [ingredient]. Suggest an alternative reasonable quantity of the item greater than
    [quantity] for the recipe step. RETURN JUST THE QUANTITY. DO NOT RETURN
    ANYTHING ELSE.

Based on the original and counterfactual quantities, we generate the counterfactual instruction and
feedback pair.

    Counterfactual Instruction
    You are an expert cooking assistant.
    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    Modify the instruction [org_instruction] for the recipe step: [org_recipe_step]; such that the
    recipe step uses [counterfactual_quantity] of [ingredient]. RETURN JUST THE INSTRUC-
    TION DO NOT RETURN ANYTHING ELSE.

                                                          20
    Counterfactual Feedback

    You are an expert cooking assistant. You are assisting a person step by step through a recipe.

    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    Instead of using the specified quantity: [quantity] of [ingredient], the person instead used the
    following quantity: [counterfactual_quantity]. Given the correct specified quantity and the
    incorrectly used quantity provide an appropriate feedback message. The feedback message
    should be short and one line in length. Make sure to point out the mistake clearly in the
    feedback message in a single line. RETURN JUST THE FEEDBACK MESSAGE DO NOT
    RETURN ANYTHING ELSE.

I.2 Preparation error

As described in the main paper, given a recipe step [org_recipe_step], we ask the LLM to extract the
preparation method [current_prep_method] and the object of the preparation method [object] and
then propose a counterfactual (alternative) preparation method [alternative_prep_method] for the
object that aligns with the original recipe step. Note, that in the prompt we use “alternative” instead
of “counterfactual” for clarity.

    Extract Attributes and Propose Counterfactual Attributes

    You are an expert cooking assistant.

    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    Given a recipe step, your task is to propose variants of that recipe step that use an
    alternative preparation method. Alternative preparation methods include: different
    blending/whisking/mixing/beating methods; using different utensils or ingredients; using left
    instead of right hands and vise versa; dealing with fluids differently; cutting or chopping
    ingredients differently.

    Now, given the following recipe step: [org_recipe_step]. Extract the specific preparation
    method used, the food item or cooking utensil used (object) and then propose an alternative
    preparation method. Make sure that the proposed alternative preparation method is realistic
    and likely to be provided by a expert cooking assistant.

    Return a dict with five keys: {‘current_prep_method’: ..., ‘object’: ... ,
    ‘alternative_prep_method’: ... , ‘current_prep_method_duration’: ..., ‘alterna-
    tive_prep_method_duration’: ...}. Where, if the current preparation method (cur-
    rent_prep_method) requires cooking (e.g. heating, boiling, microwaving) for a specific
    duration this duration is returned in [current_prep_method_duration] field (None otherwise);
    and if the alternative preparation method (alternative_prep_method_duration) requires cooking
    (e.g. heating, boiling, microwaving) for a specific duration this duration is returned in [alter-
    native_prep_method_duration] field (None otherwise). Keep the [alternative_prep_method]
    in the dict very short. RETURN JUST THE COOKING PREP METHOD DICT DO NOT
    RETURN ANYTHING ELSE.

Based on the original and counterfactual preparation methods, we generate the counterfactual instruc-
tion and feedback pair.

    Counterfactual Instruction

    You are an expert cooking assistant.

    ##INSTRUCTIONS:

                                                          21
    Generate a cooking instruction that uses the following preparation method: [alterna-
    tive_prep_method] on: [object] for: [alternative_prep_method_duration]. Here is an example
    of a similar instruction: [org_instruction]. RETURN JUST THE INSTRUCTION DO NOT
    RETURN ANYTHING ELSE.

    Counterfactual Feedback
    You are an expert cooking assistant.

    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    Instead of the correct preparation method: [org_prep_method] the person used the preparation
    method: [alternative_prep_method] – on the food item or cooking utensil: [object]. Provide
    an appropriate feedback message to the person. The feedback message should be one line
    in length and clearly point out the mistake made by the person. Make sure to point out the
    mistake clearly in the feedback message in a single line. RETURN JUST THE FEEDBACK
    MESSAGE DO NOT RETURN ANYTHING ELSE.

I.3 Technique error

As described in the main paper, given a recipe step [org_recipe_step], we ask the LLM to extract the
specific cooking technique used [technique] along with the ingredient or item (object) [item] used in
the specific technique.

    Extract Attributes from Recipe Step

    You are an expert cooking assistant. You are assisting a person step by step through a recipe.

    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    The person is trying to complete the following recipe step: [org_recipe_step].

    If the recipe step uses a specific cooking technique, example techniques include: roll, pat,
    squeeze, hold, measuring, adding, transferring, chopping, cutting, peeling, spiralizing, flipping,
    stirring, whisking, beating, return the cooking technique, return a dict with the cooking
    technique and the food item or ingredient that it is used on: {‘technique’: ..., ‘item’:...}. If
    not, return None. DO NOT RETURN ANYTHING ELSE.

Then, we ask the LLM to propose a counterfactual technique [counterfactual_technique] that aligns
with the original recipe step. In the prompt, again we use “alternative” instead of “counterfactual” for
clarity.

    Counterfactual Attributes
    You are an expert cooking assistant.

    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    Given a recipe step, [org_recipe_step] that uses the cooking technique: [technique] on [item],
    your task is to propose an alternative cooking technique. Make sure that the proposed alterna-
    tive cooking technique is realistic given the recipe step. RETURN JUST THE ALTERNATIVE
    COOKING TECHNIQUE DO NOT RETURN ANYTHING ELSE.

Based on the original and counterfactual techniques, we generate the counterfactual instruction and
feedback pair.

                                                          22
    Counterfactual Instruction

    You are an expert cooking assistant.

    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    Given the cooking instruction [org_instruction], generate a new instruction that uses the
    following cooking technique instead: [alternative_technique]. RETURN JUST THE IN-
    STRUCTION DO NOT RETURN ANYTHING ELSE.

    Counterfactual Feedback

    You are an expert cooking assistant.

    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    Instead of the correct technique: [counterfactual_technique] the person used the technique:
    [technique] – on the: [item]. Provide an appropriate feedback message to the person. The
    feedback message should be one line in length and clearly point out the mistake made by the
    person. Make sure to point out the mistake clearly in the feedback message in a single line.
    RETURN JUST THE FEEDBACK MESSAGE DO NOT RETURN ANYTHING ELSE.

I.4 Temperature error

As described in the main paper, given a recipe step [org_recipe_step], we first ask the LLM to
extract the cooking temperature or heat setting [heat_setting] using the kitchen appliance or utensil
[kitchen_item] used on the [food_item].

    Extract Attributes from Recipe Step

    You are an expert cooking assistant. You are assisting a person step by step through a recipe.

    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    The person is following the recipe step: [org_recipe_step]

    Does this recipe step involve cooking an ingredient or a food item on a kitchen appliance or
    utensil at a specific temperature or heat setting? Examples include setting an oven or a stove
    at a specific temperature or heat setting. If yes, then return the specific kitchen appliance or
    utensil (kitchen item), temperature or heat setting (heat setting) and the food item or ingredient
    (food item). Return a dict with three fields: {‘kitchen_item’: .., ‘heat_setting’: ..., ‘food_item’:
    ...} else return None. DO NOT RETURN ANYTHING ELSE.

Then, we ask the LLM to suggest a counterfactual temperature or a heat setting [counterfac-
tual_heat_setting]. We use separate (similar) prompts for higher or lower heat settings. In the
prompt, we again use “alternative” instead of “counterfactual” for clarity.

    Counterfactual Attribute (Higher)

    You are an expert cooking assistant.

    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    The following recipe step: [org_recipe_step]; uses the following kitchen appliance/utensil:
    [kitchen_item]; to cook the following food item: [food_item]; at the following heat setting:
    [heat_setting]. Suggest an alternative reasonable heat setting higher than [heat_setting] for the
    recipe step. RETURN JUST THE HEAT SETTING IF POSSIBLE ELSE RETURN NONE.
    DO NOT RETURN ANYTHING ELSE.

Based on the original and counterfactual heat settings, we generate the counterfactual instruction and
feedback pair.

                                                          23
    Counterfactual Instruction
    You are an expert cooking assistant.
    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    Modify the cooking instruction: [org_instruction]; such that the recipe step uses the fol-
    lowing heat setting: [counterfactual_heat_setting] – while cooking [food_item] on the uten-
    sil/appliance: [kitchen_item]. RETURN JUST THE INSTRUCTION DO NOT RETURN
    ANYTHING ELSE.

    Counterfactual Feedback
    You are an expert cooking assistant.
    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    Instead of using the correct heat setting: [heat_setting], the person instead used a incorrect
    heat setting: [counterfactual_heat_setting] – on the food item: [food_item] – and using the
    kitchen utensil/appliance: [kitchen_item].

    Provide an appropriate feedback message. The feedback message should be short and one line
    in length. Make sure to point out the heat setting clearly in a feedback message in a single line.
    RETURN JUST THE FEEDBACK MESSAGE DO NOT RETURN ANYTHING ELSE.

I.5 Timing error

As described in the main paper, given a recipe step [org_recipe_step], we first ask the LLM to extract
the duration [amount_of_time], the food item or ingredient [food_item] and the specific kitchen
appliance or utensil [kitchen_item] the [food_item] is cooked in.

    Extract Attributes from Recipe Step
    You are an expert cooking assistant. You are assisting a person step by step through a recipe.
    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    The person is following the recipe step: [org_recipe_step]. Does this recipe step involve
    cooking an ingredient or a food item on a kitchen appliance or utensil for a specific amount of
    time? Examples include setting an oven or a stove at a specific temperature or heat setting.

    If yes, then return the specific kitchen appliance or utensil (kitchen_item), the amount of
    time (amount_of_time) and the food item or ingredient (food_item). Return a dict with three
    fields: {‘kitchen_item’: .., ‘amount_of_time’: ..., ‘food_item’: ...}. Else return None. DO
    NOT RETURN ANYTHING ELSE.

Then, we ask the LLM to propose a counterfactual reasonable amount of time [counterfac-
tual_amount_of_time]. In the prompt, we again use “alternative” instead of “counterfactual” for
clarity.

    Counterfactual Attribute (Greater)
    You are an expert cooking assistant.

                                                          24
    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    The following recipe step: [org_recipe_step]; uses the following kitchen appliance/utensil:
    [kitchen_item]; to the cook the following food item: [food_item]; for the following amount
    of time: [amount_of_time]. Suggest an alternative reasonable amount of time significantly
    greater (at least 15 seconds) than [amount_of_time] for the recipe step. RETURN JUST
    THE AMOUNT OF TIME IF POSSIBLE ELSE RETURN NONE. DO NOT RETURN
    ANYTHING ELSE.

Based on the original and counterfactual amounts of time, we generate the counterfactual instruction
and feedback pair.

    Counterfactual Instruction
    You are an expert cooking assistant.

    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    Modify the cooking instruction: [org_instruction]; such that the recipe step uses the following
    amount of time: [counterfactual_amount_of_time] – while cooking [food_item] on the uten-
    sil/appliance: [kitchen_item]. RETURN JUST THE INSTRUCTION DO NOT RETURN
    ANYTHING ELSE.

    Counterfactual Feedback (Greater)
    You are an expert cooking assistant. You are assisting a person step by step through a recipe.

    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    Instead of the using the correct amount of time for cooking: [amount_of_time, the person did
    not cook the food item: [food_item] – and using the kitchen utensil/appliance: [kitchen_item]
    – for long enough. Provide an appropriate feedback message. The feedback message should
    be short and one line in length. Make sure to point out that the person did not cook for long
    enough clearly in the feedback message in a single line. RETURN JUST THE FEEDBACK
    MESSAGE DO NOT RETURN ANYTHING ELSE.

J EGO-COMIST Prompts: Stage 2

Here we provide the prompts used in the stage 2 (Counterfactual Feedback Timestamp Inference) of
the EGO-COMIST data generation pipeline. The prompts always use the step by step descriptions
[step_by_step_descriptions] extracted using the state of the art video LLM at timestamps [timestamps]
that are 5 seconds apart using a sliding window, as described in the main paper.

J.1 Measurement error

In addition to the step by step descriptions [step_by_step_descriptions] at timestamps [timestamps],
we use the attributes [quantity], [ingredient] and the counterfactual quantity [counterfactual_quantity]
generated in the first stage of our EGO-COMIST data generation pipeline to infer the appropriate
feedback timestamp.

                                                          25
    Feedback Timestamp (Greater Counterfactual Quantity)
    You are an expert cooking assistant. You are watching a person follow a step by step recipe.
    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    You have provided the person with the following instruction: [org_instruction].

    You are now provided with the following step by step account of the person’s activities, along
    with the corresponding timestamps: [step_by_step_instruction].

    Your task is to find the timestamp at which it becomes apparent that the person uses less than
    the instructed quality of the following: [ingredient]. The person was instructed to use the
    following quantity [quantity] but instead used [counterfactual_quantity].

    WAIT and make sure that the person does not intend to use more (the correct quantity).

    Choose one of the following options: [timestamps]. Return the timestamp in seconds from
    the options above as a python dict of the form: {‘timestamp’: ...}. DO NOT RETURN
    ANYTHING OTHER THAN THE PYTHON DICT.

J.2 Preparation error

In addition to the step by step descriptions [step_by_step_descriptions] at timestamps [timestamps],
we use the attributes: [current_prep_method], [object] extracted from the recipe step and the coun-
terfactual preparation method [alternative_prep_method] generated in the first stage of our EGO-
COMIST data generation pipeline.

    Feedback Timestamp
    You are an expert cooking assistant. You are watching a person follow a step by step recipe.
    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    You have provided the person with the following instruction: [org_instruction].

    You are now provided with the following step by step account of the person’s activities, along
    with the corresponding timestamps: [step_by_step_instruction].

    Your task is to find the timestamp at which it becomes apparent that the person has used the
    following (wrong) preparation method: [current_prep_method] – on the food item or cooking
    utensil: [object] – instead of the correct preparation method: [alternative_prep_method].

    Choose one of the following options: [timestamps]. Return the timestamp in seconds from
    the options above as a python dict of the form: {‘timestamp’: ...}. DO NOT RETURN
    ANYTHING OTHER THAN THE PYTHON DICT.

J.3 Technique error

In addition to the step by step descriptions [step_by_step_descriptions] at timestamps [timestamps],
we use the attributes: [technique] and [item], extracted from the recipe step and the counterfactual
technique [alternative_technique] generated in the first stage of our EGO-COMIST data generation
pipeline.

                                                          26
    Feedback Timestamp

    You are an expert cooking assistant. You are watching a person follow a step by step recipe.

    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    You have provided the person with the following instruction: [org_instruction].

    You are now provided with the following step by step account of the person’s activities, along
    with the corresponding timestamps: [step_by_step_instruction].

    Your task is to find the timestamp at which it becomes apparent that the person is using the
    wrong technique: [technique] – and the person does not intend to use the correct technique:
    [alternative_technique].

    Choose one of the following options: [timestamps]. Return the timestamp in seconds from
    the options above as a python dict of the form: {‘timestamp’: ...}. DO NOT RETURN
    ANYTHING OTHER THAN THE PYTHON DICT.

J.4 Temperature error

In addition to the step by step descriptions [step_by_step_descriptions] at timestamps [timestamps],
we use the attributes: [heat_setting], [kitchen_item], [food_item] extracted from the recipe step
and the counterfactual heat setting [counterfactual_heat_setting] generated in the first stage of our
EGO-COMIST data generation pipeline.

    Feedback Timestamp

    You are an expert cooking assistant. You are watching a person follow a step by step recipe.

    ##INSTRUCTIONS:
    You have provided the person with the following instruction: [org_instruction].

    You are now provided with the following step by step account of the person’s activities, along
    with the corresponding timestamps: [step_by_step_instruction].

    Your task is to find the timestamp at which it becomes apparent that the person uses the
    wrong heat/temperature setting: [heat_setting] – of the utensil/appliance: [kitchen_item]
    – to cook the following: [food_item]– instead of the correct heat/temperature setting:
    [counterfactual_heat_setting].

    Choose the EARLIEST timestamp where it becomes clear that the person has chosen the
    incorrect heat/temperature setting. (This is usually when the person starts an appliance or
    adjusts the heat setting).

    Choose one of the following options: [timestamps]. Return the timestamp in seconds from
    the options above as a python dict of the form: {‘timestamp’: ...}. DO NOT RETURN
    ANYTHING OTHER THAN THE PYTHON DICT.

J.5 Timing error

In addition to the step by step descriptions [step_by_step_descriptions] at timestamps [timestamps],
we use the attributes: [amount_of_time] and [kitchen _item] extracted from the recipe step and
the counterfactual amount of time [counterfactual_amount_of_time] generated in the first stage
of our EGO-COMIST data generation pipeline. We use two different prompts for [counterfac-
tual_amount_of_time] being larger or smaller than [amount_of_time] in the original recipe step.

                                                          27
Feedback Timestamp (Smaller Counterfactual Duration)

You are an expert cooking assistant. You are watching a person follow a step by step recipe.

##INSTRUCTIONS:
You have provided the person with the following instruction: [org_instruction].

You are now provided with the following step by step account of the person’s activities, along
with the corresponding timestamps: [step_by_step_instruction].

First find the [start_timestamp] when the person starts to cook: [food_item] – using
the utensil/appliance: [kitchen_item]. Now, instead of the specified amount of time:
[amount_of_time] – the person cooks for: [counterfactual_amount_of_time]. Find the
timestamp [critical_timestamp] at which it becomes apparent that the person does not cook:
[food_item] – using the utensil/appliance: [kitchen_item] – for long enough.

Choose one of the following options: [timestamps]. Choose the LAST timestamp where it
becomes clear that the person has not cooked for long enough, after the person stops cooking
[critical_timestamp] with the [kitchen_item], at least [amount_of_time] from the beginning of
the cooking process [start_timestamp].

Return the timestamps in seconds from the options above as a python dict of the
form: {‘start_timestamp’: ..., ‘critical_timestamp’: ...}. The ‘start_timestamp’ and ‘crit-
ical_timestamp’ should be at least [amount_of_time] seconds apart. If you are not sure of
the [start_timestamp] or [critical_timestamp] return None. DO NOT RETURN ANYTHING
OTHER THAN THE PYTHON DICT.

Feedback Timestamp (Larger Counterfactual Duration)

You are an expert cooking assistant. You are watching a person follow a step by step recipe.

##INSTRUCTIONS:
You have provided the person with the following instruction: [org_instruction].

You are now provided with the following step by step account of the person’s activities, along
with the corresponding timestamps: [step_by_step_instruction].

First find the [start_timestamp] when the person starts to cook: [food_item] – using
the utensil/appliance: [kitchen_item]. Now, instead of the specified amount of time:
[amount_of_time] – the person cooks for: [counterfactual_amount_of_time]. Find the
timestamp [critical_timestamp] at which it becomes apparent that the person cooks:
[food_item] – using the utensil/appliance: [kitchen_item] – for too long.

Choose one of the following options: [timestamps]. Choose the LAST timestamp where it
becomes clear that the person has cooked for too long, about [amount_of_time] from the be-
ginning of the cooking process [start_timestamp] with the [kitchen_item] (don’t wait too long).

Return the timestamps in seconds from the options above as a python dict of the
form: {‘start_timestamp’: ..., ‘critical_timestamp’: ...}. The ‘start_timestamp’ and ‘crit-
ical_timestamp’ should be at least [amount_of_time] seconds apart. If you are not sure of
the [start_timestamp] or [critical_timestamp] return None. DO NOT RETURN ANYTHING
OTHER THAN THE PYTHON DICT.

                                                      28
